
  ┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
  │                                                                │
  │                      Transcriber’s Notes                       │
  │                                                                │
  │                                                                │
  │  The cover image was provided by the transcriber and is placed │
  │  in the public domain.                                         │
  │                                                                │
  │  The INDEX at the end of the book is in the form of a table of │
  │  CONTENTS, and has been so labeled and moved to the front of   │
  │  the book following the Preface.                               │
  │                                                                │
  │  Punctuation has been standardized.                            │
  │                                                                │
  │  Characters in small caps have been replaced by all caps.      │
  │                                                                │
  │  Non-printable characteristics have been given the following   │
  │  transliteration:                                              │
  │      Italic text: --> _text_                                   │
  │                                                                │
  │  This book was written in a period when many words had         │
  │  not become standardized in their spelling. Words may have     │
  │  multiple spelling variations or inconsistent hyphenation in   │
  │  the text. These have been left unchanged unless indicated     │
  │  with a Transcriber’s Note.                                    │
  │                                                                │
  │  Scripture notation was shown in multiple formats. These have  │
  │  been standardized into a single format.                       │
  │                                                                │
  │  Transcriber’s Notes are used when making corrections to the   │
  │  text or to provide additional information for the modern      │
  │  reader. These notes are not identified in the text, but have  │
  │  been accumulated in a single section at the end of the book.  │
  │                                                                │
  └────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘




                        “BORN OF THE SPIRIT.”

                                 OR

                     GEMS FROM THE BOOK OF LIFE.


                                  A
                       MIRACULOUS CONVERSION.


                              THRILLING
               MANIFESTATIONS OF THE ALMIGHTY’S POWER.


               _To Save the Sick, Feed the Hungry, and
                         Clothe the Naked._


                      OUR GOD IS UNCHANGEABLE.

                   ARE THE DAYS OF MIRACLES PAST?

                       ANSWERED BY THE AUTHOR,

                         REV. ZENAS OSBORNE.

                       WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY

                   ELDER MOSES NATHANIEL DOWNING.


            “We use great plainness of speech.”--_Paul._

         “And the common people heard Him gladly.”--_Mark._


                       SARATOGA SPRINGS, N. Y.
                         JOHN JOHNSON & CO.
                                1888.




                   Entered according to the act of
                     Congress in the year 1888,
                       BY REV. ZENAS OSBORNE,
                        In the office of the
                       Librarian of Congress,
                        at Washington, D. C.




                            INTRODUCTION.


One of the specialties of this age is book-making. This argues
demand. This demand, especially in the realm of morals and religion
is based, partly on the prevalence of erroneous theories and the
importance of their refutation; partly on the necessity that renewed
and increased emphasis be given to the word of God; partly on the
existence of what is called “advanced thought,” and partly on the
fact of a great reading public. Then let the good work go on. The
servants of sin and error are busy and persistent in pushing their
productions to the front. Let the sons of “grace and truth” magnify
their office, and “hold forth the Word of Life.” The demand for good
and useful books will increase as long as error increases, as long as
truth and the Church of Christ are antagonized.

Of all human interest that of the soul is paramount. The truth
which leads to its possession is priceless. The vehicles of truth
are various and many. Truth is the enemy and exterminator of error,
and when harnessed for war it pursues and overtakes its foe, and
victorious, it shines the brighter, and is the more appreciated
by the contests through which its laurels are won. “The words of
the wise are as goods, and as nails fastened by the masters of
assemblies.” The preservation of their words is a sacred boon to
the world.

The author of “Born of the Spirit,” or “Gems from the Book of Life,”
has hit on a taking title for his book, and without doubt, the
careful and thoughtful reader will find that it is fully justified
by the subject matter of its pages. It is with great pleasure I
introduce Mr. OSBORNE to the reader. I have known him nearly thirty
years, and have been associated with him in the work of God in the
Susquehanna Annual Conference of the F. M. Church over twenty years.
He is known to be an able minister of the Lord Jesus Christ. He has
a religious experience. He has been “born again, not of blood, nor
of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.” The
many years he has spent in the Gospel ministry and his deep Christian
experience have not only enabled him to gather many “Gems from the
Book of Life,” but also have qualified him to speak with no uncertain
sound on the topics treated in his book.

The arrangement of the work is admirable, being in short chapters,
each one complete in itself. May it have a wide sale, not only
throughout the denomination of his choice, but also in thousands of
homes in the “regions beyond.” And wherever it goes may it demolish
error, encourage Christian faith, inspire Christian zeal, intensify
Christian love; and may the author, having grown gray and nearly worn
out in the service of Christ, find at the resurrection of the just
not only that he is counted among that redeemed throng, but also that
his “Born of the Spirit,” his “Gems from the Book of Life,” has, by
the blessing of God, added a multitude to that count.

                                                 M. N. DOWNING.

BINGHAMTON, N. Y., April 24, 1888.




                             DEDICATION.


To the memory of her who became my companion when we first set sail
on the domestic voyage of life, and who for seventeen years, by her
amiability, Christian integrity, and faithfulness as a wife and
mother, made home earth’s Paradise; and subsequently to her who for
nearly twenty-five years has stood so heroically with me in the joys,
sorrows, toils and sufferings consequent upon an itinerant’s life;
and to the dear children given to us by these sacred relations, who
now, as the infirmities of this uncertain life are coming upon us
with sure and certain tread, manifest in the silvery locks, furrowed
cheeks, bedimmed vision--all indicating that our sun is rapidly
descending the western slope, so tenderly care for us in bearing the
burdens of life, and lovingly provide for our comfort, is this work
sacredly dedicated by

                                                    THE AUTHOR.




                              PREFACE.


My reasons for writing and publishing this book are:

1--I believe that the Lord wanted me to. The burden has been on my
heart for years to do this very thing.

2--I have a great desire to perpetuate the glory of God for the
miraculous power displayed in saving one, who had been so great a
sinner as me, and for so many years in the toil and conflict of
life, leading me beside the still waters, and into green pastures;
delivering me out of the hand of my enemies, and all their
expectation again and again; bringing re-enforcements when it seemed
that all supplies were cut off.

3--On several occasions for miraculous deliverance from drowning,
when others perished, and for the preservation of life on other
occasions, when nearly kicked to death by vicious horses, and badly
bruised by them.

4--Living on the old battle ground, where so many battles were fought
between “The Buffalo Regency” on one side, and God’s militant host
on the other, and being so well acquainted with both sides, and the
questions involved, which resulted in the formation of the Free
Methodist Church, and in the order of Providence I was making the
Rev. John E. Robie a call when the Buffalo Regency met in council,
and determined upon the expulsion of all that endorsed Methodism
clean and clear; and then, on the other side, I was often present at
Bro. Amos Hard’s when councils of war met, and determined to stand by
the “old landmarks,” however much it might cost them.

Truly, there were giants in those days. A nobler class of saints
never wore a martyr’s crown than those of the old Genesee Conference.
Their memory is still precious.

5--To encourage precious souls that have taken the narrow way, that
have left old associations that had in days gone by been as dear
to them as life, but for conscience sake and the glory of God, had
forsaken all and cast their lot in with the unpretentious, whose aim
and object is to do all the good possible to the souls and bodies of
men, and gain the skies at last. And to persuade those who really
desire to be just what God designed we should be, and want all the
light and help possible to do likewise, cast their lot in with the
few, if the Holy Spirit leads you in that direction. It pays richly
to follow the _Pillar_ of fire, even though it may lead in peculiar
ways. It is the safe way.

Every article written in this book has been, we humbly trust, the
promptings of the Spirit for the salvation of souls and the building
up of the Redeemer’s Kingdom.

6--It has been frequently stated that the days of miracles are past,
and that we are not to expect any very great displays of God’s saving
power in these days of light and culture; but these expressions
are not in harmony with a thus saith the Lord and experience. My
conversion was just as marvelous as St. Paul’s, and what I have
passed through, and have seen of God’s power on others for more than
thirty years, has been just as miraculous as the healing of the lame
man at the beautiful gate, or the man that was blind, whom Jesus
touched, “and lo, he saw men as trees walking.”

_That double cure_ mentioned in this volume was just as great a
marvel as the expelling of the legion of devils from the men of
“Gadara.”




                              CONTENTS.


CHAP.  TITLE

       Introduction

       Dedication

       Preface

   1.  A Translation

   2.  I Wanted to Swear

   3.  About My Tobacco

   4.  The Plague of Narcotics

   5.  A Call to the Ministry

   6.  A Particular Providence

   7.  A Peculiar People

   8.  The Free Methodist Church a Necessity

   9.  Dreams, Presentiments

  10.  Healing Faith

  11.  A Double Cure

  12.  Justification

  13.  A Direct Route

  14.  Rest, But Not Loiter

  15.  A Living Sacrifice

  16.  The Law And The Gospel

  17.  Keep The Sabbath Day Holy

  18.  Your Fruit Unto Holiness

  19.  Without Natural Affection

  20.  Sowing And Reaping

  21.  To Actual Settlers

  22.  The Widow’s Mite

  23.  Are We Drifting

  24.  Pap

  25.  Victory

  26.  Lock Up

  27.  A Success

  28.  They Might Be A Success

  29.  Fear, Or The Scare-crow Devil

  30.  Trust

  31.  Seeing Eye To Eye

  32.  The Edge Off

  33.  The Old Salt Lick

  34.  Be Positive

  35.  The Dead Line

  36.  Pump Logs

  37.  The End

  38.  Conclusion




                                 I.

                           A TRANSLATION.


            “Once I wandered in the maze of error,
               In the downward road;
             Oft my soul was filled with fear and terror
               When I thought of God.
             Jesus saw me rushing on to ruin,
               Offered pardoning grace;
             And I left the way I was pursuing,
               Turned and saw his face.

             CHORUS--
                 Now I feel my sins forgiven,
                   Through th’ atoning blood,
                 And I have a blessed hope of heaven,
                   Glory be to God.

             I am glad I ever found the Saviour,
               Now I’m fully blest;
             There are pleasures in His pardoning favor,
               Joy, and peace, and rest.
             I’m standing on the holy mountain,
               Near Salvation’s pool,
             And the waters from the bursting fountain
               Cheer my thirsty soul.

             I’ve left earth’s vain and fleeting pleasures,
               Bade them all adieu;
             And I’m seeking now for heavenly treasures,
               Lasting, pure and true.
             Glittering toys of time, farewell forever;
               To you I’ll not bow;
             I will leave my blessed Jesus never;
               He’s my portion now.

             I will tell Salvation’s pleasing story,
               While I live below,
             And I’ll try to spread my Saviour’s glory,
               Everywhere I go.
             When the word is from the Master given,
               ‘Child, from toiling cease,’
             I expect to find a home in heaven,
               Home of endless peace.”

When young, I was “trained up in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord.” Well do I recollect some of the first lessons taught me by my
parents--such as “Our Father which art in heaven,” and “Now I lay
me down to sleep,” and others of a like character. These were in
the morn of life, printed upon memory’s tablet. I always believed
there was a divine reality in the religion of Jesus Christ. I do not
recollect a long time when the Spirit of God did not strive with me,
and often powerfully; so that frequently I felt that I was the chief
of sinners. I would often resolve to seek the Lord, and when the
time came I would procrastinate for a more convenient season. Thus I
grieved my heavenly Father for thirty-two long years.

I wonder that God spared my unprofitable life so long. My father was
a lover of the truth, as it is in Christ Jesus. He had great respect
for the Sabbath--hence the children were not allowed to play and
frolic about on the Lord’s Day. I praise God for these early, godly
impressions. Well do I recollect, when a very small child, sitting in
my little chair, and singing with my father these beautiful lines,
“O, how happy are they who their Saviour obey,” etc.

At the age of eight I went with my father to a quarterly meeting,
held in a barn. While the saints were upon their knees in prayer, I
was upon my knees calling upon the name of the Lord. I felt something
going through me like lightning, producing a heavenly sweetness;
also that I had suddenly been put in possession of wings, for I felt
like flying. As I look back upon this scene, I have no doubt but
that God’s blessing was upon me on that occasion. I was frequently
under such deep conviction of sin that I could not sleep nights.
These seasons of deep conviction continued with me until I was
converted to God. After these seasons of conviction I became more
hardened in sin. On several occasions I was brought near to death by
disease, drowning, and in other ways. If being delivered from the
jaws of death in a variety of ways is evidence of our election, then
I am elected, for I have been thus delivered. I praise God that our
election has a different foundation--even JESUS CHRIST--the Saviour
of men.

At the age of twenty, I agreed with some of my associates to go
forward to the mourners’ seat for prayers, as the preacher had said
that the next night would close the meetings unless there should be
a move among the sinners. We did not want the meetings to close,
neither did we mean to get religion at that time. I loved to attend
religious meetings, not because it was _right_, but to _see_ and be
seen, and to enjoy the society of kindred spirits. The night arrived
in which we had agreed to make a move, to prevent the meetings from
being broken up. Meetings had been run for several weeks, without any
apparent success, until _the_ night in which we had agreed to move.
After preaching, the invitation was given to any wishing religion.
One of the company went forward, and then another. I thought of my
word; I had agreed to go. It was an awful moment with me. I thought
that we were trifling with the Almighty. I would have given worlds,
if I could, to be out of the scrape. I shook from head to foot, like
Belshazzar of old. I was completely covered with sweat, so terribly
was I exercised. The company had all gone; I was left. I started;
had all I could do to get to the seat. God overruled this for His
glory. Some twenty-five went forward that night. The meetings went on
with power and profit. Many were converted to God. My condition was
painful in the extreme. For several days after this I seemed to be
on the boundary line between the two worlds, and about to be ushered
into the everlasting burnings. Whenever I closed my eyes to sleep
I seemed to be surrounded by the damned in hell. O, what a view I
had of the lost! How I seemed to hear the wailings of despair, and
realized that this was the doom of the wicked. After this I became
more wicked than before. I was a complete adept in wickedness. I
had been free from all parental restraint from the time I was about
twelve years old. I mingled in all kinds of society; hence I had an
excellent opportunity for learning much of the evil that exists at
the present day. I learned too much.

I wonder that God did not cut me off in my sins, after grieving his
spirit so long. _He is not willing that any should perish._ I had
felt for several years that I should not have the strivings of the
Spirit but once more, and then, if I did not yield, I should be left
to myself, abandoned of God.

On the fifth of February, 1857, God met me in the road. These words
came with great force to my mind: “Choose you this day whom ye will
serve. _Come, decide the matter now._ If you mean to serve the devil
the remainder of your life, say so right _here_. Have this matter
_settled forever_. If you mean to give yourself to God, do it _now_!
This is the time.”

These were awful moments to me. “Choose you this day whom ye will
serve.” I was pressed to a decision. My immortal spirit seemed to
balance between heaven and hell. Heaven, with all that is lovely,
joys immortal forever at God’s right hand, seemed to be clearly
presented on the one hand; and the damnation of hell on the other.
_Which will you have?_ I resolved from that time, henceforth and
forever, to seek after and serve God with all my redeemed powers.
That evening I erected a family altar, and commenced calling upon the
name of the Lord. The next morning I thanked God for keeping me and
mine through the night; and when seated around the table I thanked
God for the food prepared for us. This was really a great cross. I
had _vowed_ to God, the residue of my life should be spent in His
service. I continued to seek the Lord by doing everything I thought a
Christian ought to do. I made it a specialty to get religion. I cried
unto the Lord with all my heart, and the more I prayed the worse I
felt. For three days and nights I was wrestling with God in prayer. I
confessed my sins. I did all that I could. After continuing in this
way for about three days, it occurred to me that there was no mercy
for me. I had sinned away the day of grace. These were truly awful
moments to me. No hope! No mercy! No salvation! Right here the spirit
whispered to my aching heart, “Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and
thou shalt be saved;” and blessed be God, right here I was enabled
to believe that Jesus Christ was my Saviour. My weight of guilt was
gone. Joy and peace filled my heart. Old things had passed away, and
behold! _all_ things had become new. I sprang to my feet and praised
God aloud! At this point in my experience, my feelings are well
described in those beautiful lines of Dr. Hunter:

              Sinking and panting, as for breath,
                I knew not help was near me,
              And cried, “O, save me, Lord, from death!
                Immortal Jesus, hear me!”

              Then, quick as thought, I felt Him mine,
                My Saviour stood before me!
              I saw his brightness round me shine,
                  And shouted, Glory! Glory!

                Oh, sacred hour! Oh, hallowed spot!
                  Where love divine first found me;
                Wherever falls my distant lot,
                  My heart shall linger round thee!

                And when from earth I rise to soar
                  Up to my home in heaven,
                Down will I cast my eyes once more,
                  Where first I was forgiven.




                                 II.

                         I WANTED TO SWEAR;

           OR, HOW I KNEW THE DOCTRINE OF ENTIRE HOLINESS,
                AS TAUGHT BY JOHN WESLEY TO BE TRUE.


My conversion to God was as clear as the sun at noon-day; “Old things
passed away and _all_ things became new.” As I looked out the next
morning upon the fields and woods, all seemed to be praising God. My
soul was completely ravished with his love. I had been “translated
from the kingdom of darkness to the kingdom of God’s dear Son.” I
was emphatically a new creature in Christ Jesus; all the aspirations
of my soul were changed. I wanted to tell everybody what the blessed
Jesus had done for me; I felt like crying continually, “_Behold the
Lamb!_” God helped me to tell the story of the cross, which kept the
fire burning within--Glory to God! “As I came to Zion, songs and
everlasting joy was upon my head,” and in my heart. For days

            “Not a cloud did arise to darken my skies,
             Or hide one moment, my Lord from my eyes.”
                   “And I could not believe
                    That I ever should grieve,
                 That I ever should suffer again.”

I thought that I never should have any more bad feelings; I expected
to rejoice evermore. This state of things continued about three
weeks; when at family prayer in the evening I was very much blessed.
“Heaven came down my soul to greet, and glory crowned the mercy
seat.” I was praising God with a heart overflowing with love, when
suddenly my _jaws closed_; I wanted to continue praising God, but
could not; my jaws were set together like a steel trap; _they would
not open_. I thought it would be some relief if my wife or sister
would pray. I tried to turn around to see why they did not, but could
not; I was immovably fixed on my knees. I began to wonder _what
was the matter_. The devil told me it was a _paralytic_ stroke. I
said, “Yes, I guess it is;” then darkness came upon me. I did not
feel quite as well after that. The next accusation was I had got
a fit of _apoplexy_, to which I said, “Yes, I guess I have;” then
darkness spread over me afresh. _He_ said that I was a fit subject
for apoplexy, and probably I was very near my end, as they generally
died with the third fit. I consented to all he said as true, and
before this passed off I was feeling bad, _all through ignorance
and unbelief_. I do not know how long I remained in this helpless
condition, but when I came out I felt that I had been shocked with
a heavy battery. While in this condition I was in full possession
of every faculty of the mind, and remember distinctly all that
occurred. I was a disbeliever in the power of the Holy Ghost to slay
people, notwithstanding I had been accustomed to seeing such things
from youth, but really believed it to be mesmerism or excitement.
After I came out of this it occurred to me that perhaps what I had
just experienced was the power of the Holy Ghost; and if so, I had
done wrong. I went immediately to have the matter settled. I told
my father that I wanted to be right, and if what I had just passed
through was the effect of the Holy Ghost, let it come on me in the
same way again. I felt it coming as before; and _he_ that said it was
a fit of apoplexy, now said, “Look out, it will kill you.” I sprang
to my feet and _cried_ to the Lord to stay his hand. It seemed to
me that I could not live under the pressure, under that weight of
love that God was letting down into my soul and on my body. I went
to bed, but not to sleep. The accuser was after me; he told me that
my duty was very plain. “Ever since God converted you, you have been
continually asking Him to bless you; it has come very near killing
you, and will if you continue in this way; _now_ you must ask God
_not_ to bless you.” I very soon learned that these suggestions
were from the devil; and that to be the Lord’s entire, to follow
the Lamb whithersoever he would lead us, was to place ourselves in
direct opposition to the mass of those that profess the religion of
Jesus Christ. I began to realize that the religion of Jesus Christ
_was peculiar_; unlike the world; and if I saved my soul, I must
be peculiar. The question came with force: _Are you willing to be
peculiar for God?_ My spirit seemed to be willing, but the flesh
rebelled. I thought much of my good name. Now I saw, that to be
a _real_ child of God, was to suffer and bear reproach. O, how I
writhed in agony. What! to have my good name cast out as evil, _to
be misunderstood_, considered as _filth_, rejected of men. Here was
_dying_; this was _painful_, to bring all my powers to submit to the
will of God. I thought, when I was converted that I had given all to
him; but here was something that I did not see at that time. I had
commenced a pilgrimage, and had no disposition to go back. I had left
_Sodom_, and still the command was ringing in my ears, “_Escape for
thy life, look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plain;
escape to the mountain lest thou be consumed_.” As the light was
shining upon me, _and the way_, and after much wrestling in prayer,
not only my will responded to the will of God, but I could say all
through me--

                    “Lord, obediently I’ll go,
                     Gladly leaving all below.”

After this my peace flowed like a river.

                    “Jesus all the day long
                     Was my joy and my song.”

I lived in a heavenly atmosphere, far above the common walks of life.
Glory to God and the Lamb forever! for a salvation that has _life_
and _peace_ and _joy in the Holy Ghost_, amen! and amen! The fire
burns while I write--bless the Lord! I believed that Jesus saved me
from _all_ my sins. I did not understand the nature of inbred sin. I
had felt nothing but love to God and all mankind. _The roots of old
depravity had not yet been disturbed, hence I did not believe they
existed._ I was soon to be tested upon this point.

Soon after my conversion I had placed in my hands several works on
holiness: Wesley, Wallace, Foster, and Mrs. Palmer. On examining
these books I felt that I had got in the _first_ blessing all they
claimed for the _second_. I was soon to learn that justification,
though clear and positive, _did not remove the roots of bitterness_,
the remains of the carnal mind.

About four weeks after my conversion, one cold day in March, I wanted
to move a stove of the Clinton air-tight pattern from one room to
another with the fire in it, just as we were using it, as it was
cold, and the only stove we had up. I laid my plans, and commenced
the job in earnest. I succeeded in getting the pipe in position and
the stove moved, but now came the tug of war. The pipe would not
go together as I expected. I had been feeling remarkably good, but
suddenly my feelings underwent a tremendous change; I seemed to be
all on fire; and like Mount Vesuvius, just ready to belch forth fire
and lava. You ask, dear reader, what was the matter? Why, my pipe
would not go together; and besides, I pinched my fingers, the smoke
filled my eyes, and yet the pipe would not unite. Again and again I
pinched my fingers and smoked my eyes until it seemed to me that I
should _burst_ if I did not curse and swear with all my might. I set
my jaws together like a steel trap, lest I should give vent to the
_smoke_ that raged within. I finished my job, and away I went, to
where no eye but God could see me. I fell on my face and cried for
mercy. This element in my heart gave me more pain than anything I had
ever met with. O, how I loathed myself. I saw clearly the nature of
my _disease_. Old depravity was at the bottom of all this difficulty.
The tree had been cut down, but the roots were all there.

Dear reader, these roots may not have affected you just as they did
me; but if you are not _sanctified wholly_, they are there, in the
heart and will, when the hot breath of Apolyon comes upon you, strive
for the supremacy. This experience brought clearly to my mind, the
doctrine of _sanctification_ as taught by John Wesley. I commenced in
earnest the study of the Bible, to learn God’s will in this matter.
I found it full of holiness. I saw that it was not only my privilege
to be made holy in this life, but a _positive_ command: “_Be ye holy,
for I am holy._” My conviction for this blessing was deep, clear,
pungent and abiding. O, how my soul cried out after a clean heart. I
said that if the religion of Jesus Christ did not take out all sin
from the heart, it was a failure.

Blessed be God! I have proved that Jesus Christ can save to the
uttermost. In fifty-eight, at a camp-meeting in Bergen, N. Y., I was
enabled to give myself fully to God, and to claim Jesus Christ as
my full and complete Saviour. O, how I felt the blood washing and
cleansing my heart, from all the remains of the carnal mind. When
the blessing came I was lost to all surrounding objects; but what
communion I had with the Father and with the Son, and with the Holy
Ghost. Light shone all through me. I could see every part of my moral
being; and O! how clean and pure; _those roots_ were gone. My soul
cried out--

               “’Tis done, Thou dost this moment save,
                  With full salvation bless,
                Redemption in Thy blood I have,
                  And spotless love and peace.”




                                III.

                          ABOUT MY TOBACCO.


For years prior to my conversion to God, I had firmly believed
that “strait is the gate and narrow is the way which leadeth unto
life, and few there be that find it.” The consecration to be made
in order to receive the grace of God and eternal life seemed to me
to include every thing: all we think, speak or do. To meet this
demand, my business relations had to be given up. I had used tobacco
about twelve years; but in making my consecration to God I left
this out. It had never occurred to me that it was wicked to use it;
in fact, I had never heard or read that it was. I had associated
with the Methodists from my youth up, and knew that her preachers,
class-leaders and stewards used it; and having an exalted opinion of
them, had come to look upon the practice as harmless. And yet it did
seem to me that preachers of the Gospel of Jesus Christ ought to be
clean and pure. God the Holy Ghost, let me see, the first time I used
it after my conversion, that it was wrong for me to use it. As I put
the filthy stuff in my mouth, the Holy Spirit said, “What do you do
that for?” This came with such force that I was very much startled. I
replied that I used it for the dyspepsia. The Spirit said, “You have
no dyspepsia; and if you had, tobacco would not cure it; it rather
creates it.”

I then tried to hunt up other reasons for using it, as the Spirit
of God continued to press the question, “What do you use it for?”
But all my reasons were completely upset by the clear reasoning of
conscience and the Holy Ghost. I now perceived that God was trying
to teach me the way of life more perfectly. He said, “You have given
yourself to me, to be mine entirely.” I said, “Yea, Lord, all is
thine.” “Your body is a temple for the Holy Ghost; you are to be
temperate in all things; nothing must enter it that defileth; tobacco
defileth it. All you possess belongs to God--your money, your time,
talents--all are his, and must be used for His glory; hence you
cannot spend your money for tobacco.”

A great many ways were pointed out to me in which I could glorify God
in a proper use of what He had given to me, instead of an investment
worse than useless. Every time that I used it after my conversion,
until I wholly abandoned it, this same controversy was kept up.
In reading the Bible I found it condemned the practice. I became
satisfied that I had got to abandon either the one or the other--my
tobacco or Jesus Christ. I could not remain justified and defile
myself with it.

Now came the giving up process. I resolved to do it gradually, lest
I should be made sick, for the tempter told me that would be the
result. I then threw away my box, and carried what tobacco I had
down cellar, determined not to use it but three times a day, and
thus by a gradual process work a cure. I soon wanted a chew. Down
cellar I went and took the weed; it never seemed to taste quite so
good before; so self suggested the idea of putting a little in my
pocket; I might want a little very much; so I put a little in my
pocket; and thus I continued to do until my tobacco was all gone; and
instead of carrying it in a box, or in one pocket, I had it in nearly
every pocket about me. Oh, how mean I felt when I was brought to a
realization of my bondage to such a filthy habit. It had wound its
slimy folds about me so long that I seemed to be completely within
its power.

But here I resolved to try the strength and power of grace divine.
I now determined to be a free man; sink or swim, survive or perish,
living or dying, I meant to have the victory over this habit. I got
down before God in the dust, told him all about my weakness, and
about my miserable habit, and cried, “O Lord, deliver me from this
filthy, wicked, intemperate habit, for Jesus’ sake. Amen.”

Blessed be God, help came. I got the victory. Oh, glory to God and
the Lamb forever and ever. Every band was severed; I was free, and
blessed be God, I have walked at liberty ever since. I have never
had the least desire to use the weed since I was delivered from my
bondage to filth. Since then I can sing--

                    “Now I am from bondage free,
                      Every chain is riven;
                    Jesus makes me free indeed,
                      Just as free as heaven.”




                                 IV.

                      THE PLAGUE OF NARCOTICS.


A part of this article is from the pen of Dr. Talmage. He said that
America had some as bad plagues as those of Egypt, and characterized
narcotics as follows:

“In all ages the world has sought out some flower or herb or weed
to stimulate, to alleviate, or to compose its griefs. A drink
called nepenthe calmed the nerves of Greeks and Egyptians. Theben
women knew how to compound it. Nepenthe passed away and next came
hasheesh, manufactured from Indian hemp. Whole nations have been
stimulated, narcotized, and made imbecile with the use of accursed
hasheesh. Visions are conjured up gorgeous and magnificent beyond
all description, but it finally drags down body, mind and soul. I
knew one of the most brilliant men of this city (Philadelphia) taken
captive by this drug. Friends tried in vain to save him. First body
gave way, then his mind. He became a raving maniac, blaspheming God
into a starless eternity.

OPIUM is the scourge of nations.”

In 1861 we used 109,000 pounds. In 1887 not far from 1,000,000
pounds. At the present--1888--we have, beyond doubt, more than
1,000,000 opium consumers. That is appalling! Don’t think that those
are merely barbaric Asiatics.

SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE, after conquering the world, was conquered
by opium. There are thousands, more women than men, who are being
bound body, mind and soul by this terrific drug. There is a great
mystery about some families. You don’t know why they don’t get along.
The opium habit is stealthy, deceitful, deathful. You can cure one
hundred drunkards where you can cure one opium eater.

Have you just begun to use it for the assuagement of physical
distress? I beg of you stop! The pleasures at the start will not pay
for the horrors at the end.

MORPHIA is a blessing from God for the relief of pain, but it was
never intended to be prolonged for years.

Statistics show that there are opium eaters in this country exceeding
a million. With some hydrate of chloral is taking the place of opium.

BARON LIEBIG knows that one chemist in Germany makes half a ton of
hydrate of chloral a week. There are multitudes taken down with this
drug. _Look out for hydrate of chloral!_ You never heard a sermon
against opium, but it seems to me there ought to be ten thousand
pulpits turned into a quickening flame, thundering Zion’s warning
against this black narcotic.

You all know what botanists describe as NICOTIANA. You know it
as the inspiring, elevating, emparadising, nerve-shattering,
dyspepsia-breeding, health-destroying tobacco. I shall not be
offensively personal on this subject, for you nearly all use it. You
say that God made it, and it is good. Yes, it is good to kill moths,
to kill ticks on sheep, to strangle all kinds of vermin, to fumigate
pestiferous places. You say God created it for some particular use.
Yes, so He did henbane, and nux vomica, and copperas, and belladona,
and all those poisons.

You say men live to be old who use it. Yes, in the sense that the man
lasted well who was pickled. Smokers are turned into smoked livers.
You should advise your children to abstain from it, because the whole
medical fraternity of the United States and Great Britain pronounced
it the cause of wide-spread ill-health. Drs. Agnew, Hamilton,
Woodward--the whole medical fraternity, Allopathic, Homeopathic,
Hydropathic and Eclectic denounce it. The use of tobacco tends to
drunkenness. It creates unnatural thirst. The way that leads down to
a drunkard’s grave and a drunkard’s hell is strewn thick with tobacco
leaves. _That man is not thoroughly converted who has not only got
his heart clean, but got his mouth clean also._

BEN. FRANKLIN said he never saw a well man in the exercise of common
sense who would say that tobacco did him any good.

THOMAS JEFFERSON argued against the culture of tobacco.

HORACE GREELEY said: “It is a burning stench.”

DANIEL WEBSTER said: “Let those men who smoke go to the horse shed.”

One reason why there are so many victims to the tobacco habit is
because so many ministers smoke and chew. They smoke until they have
bronchitis, and then the dear people must send them to Europe. I
can name three eminent clergymen who died of cancer in the mouth,
an evil caused by their tobacco. There has been many a clergyman
whose tombstone was covered up with eulogy, who ought to have had an
inscription, “Killed by too much Cavendish.” Some smoke until the
room is blue, their spirits are blue, the world is blue. The American
clergymen who are indulging in the habit should repent. How can a
man preach repentance when he indulges in such a habit. I have known
_Presbyteries and General Assemblies and General Synods_ where there
was a room set apart for ministers to smoke in.

It is time we had an anti-tobacco reform in the _Presbyterian_, the
_Baptist_, and the _Congregational_ churches.”

Thank God there is one church, the FREE METHODIST, that has a pure
ministry. _They_ are not defiled by “_narcotics_.” None are received
into the Free Methodist Church that use tobacco in any way, in the
ministry or laity.




                                 V.

                       A CALL TO THE MINISTRY.


The Gospel of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ is a system of
instruction. It contemplates the instruction of the ignorant until
the whole world shall be enlightened; until the knowledge of Christ
shall cover the whole earth as the waters cover the sea. It makes
provision for having this instruction perpetuated. God provides for
every department of this stupendous work of bringing this wicked
world back from her revolt to Christ and God. To this end the
ministry were appointed. Under the old dispensation God appointed men
to preach and teach. They were termed prophets. They spake as they
were moved upon by the Holy Ghost. Enoch was a preacher. He taught
the doctrine of a general judgment, the resurrection of the dead, and
a just retribution for our conduct in this life.

He taught the duty of repentance of all wrong deeds. He enforced
his preaching by a godly life. “He walked with God!” “God spared
not the old world, but saved Noah, the eighth person, a preacher
of righteousness.” In these far off ages they were blessed with
teachers. Abraham was a preacher of righteousness in his day. Other
patriarchs said of him: “Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets
no harm.” Samuel, Elijah and Elisha were of that number that taught
the people.

The Christian dispensation had in its very beginning teachers
appointed directly by divine authority. Take one text among many:
Eph. 4:11-13. “And he gave some apostles, and some prophets, and some
evangelists, and some teachers, for the perfecting of the saints, for
the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ.”

Again: “Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to every
creature; and lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the
world.”

God has ordained that by a holy ministry the Gospel shall be
preached, and the world brought back to Christ. Thus far the call
to the ministry has been stated by way of preface. God makes choice
of His own laborers for this, the grandest of all positions in this
life, preaching the Gospel. We cannot take this responsibility upon
ourselves, if we do we are simply hirelings, as is the case, we fear,
with too many that occupy the sacred desk.

Many, I have no doubt, have been called to the pulpit by their
parents. They have looked upon the ministry as an exalted and an
honorable position, and have entertained an all-absorbing desire
that their boy should preach the Gospel. They may have been pious
and devout people, but have made a very common mistake of supposing
their desire to be the voice of the Spirit calling their boy to the
ministry. In order to meet the obligations of the ministry, what
God requires, and what the people demand, the call to this high and
holy position _must_ come from God. In these days of compromise and
corruption there are too many pulpits, instead of being a light-house
erected upon a dangerous coast, to warn the mariner of their imminent
danger, giving an uncertain sound.

God’s ministers have all been called into the ministry. They have
not taken it upon themselves. It has come to them like an awful
night-mare in the still hours of the night; when about their daily
cares; sleeping or waking; journeying by land or sea; among friends
or foes; whether suffering from poverty or abounding in wealth;
woe is me if I preach not the Gospel of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ. This will look like a stupendous job, almost like an
insurmountable task to the person truly called of God to preach the
unsearchable riches of Christ. At the same time they will feel, O,
how poorly qualified I am for such an undertaking. And the more they
look at themselves the greater the burden seems to grow. To be an
embassador of the Lord Jesus Christ, chosen of Him, commissioned
to treat with a rebel government, those in open rebellion to His
divine majesty, is higher honor than was ever bestowed upon any
other mortal. The crowned heads of this world might well envy
the very smallest man or woman that wears the royal diadem that
Christ puts on the brow of His servants. To me, there was always a
sacredness connected with the ministry of Christ. From my earliest
recollection I have looked upon the minister of God as occupying
the very highest position and receiving the highest honor awarded
to any of earth’s subjects; and how men thus called, can come down
from so high and holy a calling to mingling in the rottenness of
the day, is a profound mystery to me, and how men can consent to be
put in a semi-nude state, cable-towed, hoodwinked, and then take
upon themselves obligations too horrible for humanity, and by those
professedly called to be a minister of Christ, to me is certainly
incomprehensible.

The Master says, “Ye cannot serve God and mammon.” When God calls a
man to preach it embraces all there is of the individual, with all
possible development: mental, moral and physical; so that the man
of God will improve every chance of doing good and of getting good,
including hard study for the development of the mind; practicing
the laws of health for the development of our being for greater
efficiency in the Master’s service.

The word of the Lord is: “Study to show thyself approved unto God.”
Success comes on this line of action. I believe that the minister
should study and write as though the whole thing depended on this for
success; and then he should pray as though everything depended on
prayer; and when he gets into the pulpit he should trust alone in God
the Holy Ghost as though entire success depended on help from above.
On this line the stream of salvation will flow into the pulpit and
into the pew, and the results will be the salvation of precious souls
and the sanctifying of believers. Glory to God. Amen.

We are to glorify Him with our physical powers, as these belong to
Him. Hence, we will carefully study ourselves, the laws that govern
our own being, eat and drink, labor and rest so as to produce the
greatest development for His glory.

The mission of the minister of Christ is of the utmost importance,
because it has to do with those that must live forever with God
and angels and the redeemed of earth in the world that is to come,
or with those that reject Christ and everything that is good, and
together are cast out into outer darkness, where the flames of their
torment will ascend up for ever and ever. And then to think that a
single word, or look, may change the destiny of a soul! Well might
the apostle exclaim, “And who is sufficient for these things?” The
Gospel must be proclaimed with great tenderness of spirit, and in
deep love for the souls of those that are in their sins; love that
is all aflame for the perishing. A minister should keep as near the
head of the church as possible. He should pattern after the Master in
simplicity, in naturalness, in literalness, in appropriateness and
in holiness. As He is in the world, _so are we_, so clean and pure;
morally speaking, the minister should be transparent--Christ shining
out in all his ways--looking, speaking, doing the right thing at the
right time and in the right manner. Speaking as one that must give an
account in that day for words uttered. Looking like one that has been
with Christ and learned of Him. How often a word from the man of God
has been like the pouring of oil on the troubled sea. A man called
to minister in holy things must remember that he is a peacemaker. In
almost every place there is a marvelous chance to stir up strife.
This must be avoided. “Study to show thyself approved,” says the
apostle. Appropriateness is an essential element in the minister of
God. A congregation of idiots could not appreciate a discourse on
moral philosophy. Neither would a mass of unsaved men and women enjoy
a sermon on entire holiness!

Much labor has been lost, and the work greatly retarded, because
of unwise action. Words, style, or the manner in which it has been
presented, has been so presented, that opposition has been aroused,
and the work of soul-saving has been greatly hindered, if not
entirely destroyed.

A great many have been driven from the penitents’ altar because of
unkind treatment at the altar. They were sinners, to be sure, and
came to the altar as such; and in their great distress of mind,
before God had a chance to do much for them, some unwise person
would, in commanding tones, ask them to pull off their feathers,
gold, or something attached to their person. This would have been
proper at the right time, but the hammer came down before the iron
was hot. The results were in these cases they flew off in a tangent,
mad. The blacksmith knows about how hot his iron must be to work and
weld; precisely so with human hearts; they must be under the direct
rays of the Holy Ghost and kept there until made tender, then it can
be worked. Glory to God! Brother, don’t try to work cold iron--the
iron of cold hearts. It will be in every case a failure. Keep
baptized with the Holy Ghost and fire. This has been your great need
in the past. As you go forth to labor in God’s vineyard, go with the
baptism of power, love and the Holy Ghost. On this line, success will
come.

Doubtless some are called to the ministry early in life. Samuel was
called to the prophetic office when but a lad. It has been stated
by a great many that labored long as embassadors of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that very early in life they felt an undefinable impression
resting upon them, and at times this impression would be very strong,
that some time in the near future, they would have to preach the
gospel.

This was the condition of your humble servant. Early in life he felt
that that would be his employment in after years. Of all the innocent
amusements of childhood, what he called preaching to other children,
to the chairs placed in the order of a congregation, or to a field of
pumpkins, (for he would often do that) was to him greater diversion
than any other kind of amusement.

At the age of fifteen I was standing near State street bridge,
Albany, N. Y., a couple of officers were conveying a crazy man from
the cars to the steamboat, as they were going down the river to
Hudson with him. The crazy man caught hold of one of the chains used
to draw up a portion of the bridge to let vessels through, screaming
and making a great ado. This drew the attention of the people, as
many were crossing, it being car time, so that in a moment the draw
part of the bridge was literally covered. It was estimated that some
three hundred, besides three horses, were on this part of the bridge.
I moved along on to the bridge to see what the matter was. No sooner
had I reached the highest point on the bridge, than it broke off on
both sides, letting this mass of humanity suddenly into the water. I
was suddenly hurled into the river with the rest. I had to swim some
six to ten rods before I found anything that I could cling to. I came
to a small boat into which I climbed, then onto a canal boat and went
back where I could see that crowd of people struggling and screaming
for life. This was an awful sight. Groups of men, from one to six
or more were making a desperate effort for life. Without a moment’s
warning they were put in this awful condition, and now, eternity
was staring them in the face. Presently the dead and dying were all
around me. The thought came: “_Why was not I drowned with the rest?_”
for some forty had passed suddenly into eternity. This answer came to
the inquiry, “I have saved you to preach my gospel.”

After years of wandering in sin, and man’s estate had been reached,
with family cares and responsibilities, I erected a family altar,
sought and found the pearl of great price; and with this new
experience came a strong and an abiding conviction that I must preach
the Gospel. In whatever direction I would try to turn my attention,
this thought would loom up above all others, “_Preach my Gospel_.”
I had but little conception of the awful responsibility connected
with the ministry. And yet I had some idea of the vastness of the
work, and in looking at myself it did seem to me that I never could
attain unto the ideality of the work as I then viewed it. I was
timid, ignorant, culture limited. Can God qualify me for this exalted
position? These were serious considerations. The call was as clear to
me as the sun at noonday. Notwithstanding the clearness of the call
by the Spirit, I was often making bargains with the Lord, as Gideon
did. He would ask for a wet fleece, and the fleece would be wet. And
then for a dry fleece, and the fleece would be dry.

In the beginning of my ministry I would say to the Lord something
like this: O Lord, if Thou hast called me to preach Thy Word, give
me a soul to-day, as evidence that I am called to preach. Asking for
evidence of this character continued for several years; and I would
say to the glory of God, that on these occasions souls were always
saved. Though the enemy would often say: “That is no evidence, for
these have been prayed for by these old saints for years. They were
saved through the instrumentality of these gray-haired saints.” For
the time it would trouble me quite a little, so I would continue to
ask for evidences.

Every one truly called of God to preach His Gospel, understand some
of the many obstacles to be overcome before he reaches the holy of
holies, where, under a clear sky, with his eye on the Judgment, and
the condition of the lost before him, he can proclaim the everlasting
Gospel to perishing humanity, with the Holy Ghost sent down from
heaven. One of the greatest barriers to my entering upon the
ministry, was my dear companion. While she was a dear, good woman,
she could not bear the idea of her husband becoming a preacher; and
would on all occasions when she thought the subject was going to be
introduced, talk discouragement, and say to her husband, “I think
that you would make a good class-leader but not a preacher.” I was
marvelously attached to my wife, because of her intrinsic merits;
hence, her views of his duty to his family, to God and His church
were very great obstacles to surmount.

The time came when, according to my vows, I must leave all and follow
Christ, or lose my religion. What could be done! A field was opened,
my services were wanted. Wife refuses to go; with light around the
cross but a heavy burden on my soul, I took my leave of the dear
home; yea, the dearest spot on earth, for there had nothing but love
dwelt in that family circle. Parents and children were passionately
devoted to each other.

I found myself very much at home in the work of the ministry. After
an absence of six weeks I returned home, hoping that my wife had
changed her mind, and would accompany me to my field of labor. In
this I was disappointed. She was just as unwilling to go then as at
the first. I returned to my circuit with a heavy heart. I felt that I
was in God’s order, so I asked the Lord to let my dear companion see
it as in the light of eternity. After the elapse of another six weeks
I returned for the same purpose, and with the same results as above
stated.

I succeeded in getting her at this second visit home, to go with
Brother and Sister Roberts to a camp-meeting which was coming off at
Ackron, N. Y., and I returned to my circuit. Eternity alone can tell
the soul burden and mental conflict during these days.

The camp-meeting had not been running many days before a fearful
cyclone made its appearance. The sky put on her fearful robes of
thunder and lightning, with other sounds of a dismal character.
Darkness spread over the encampment. Nature was in strange commotion.
Alarm and terror was manifested by nearly all that were at that
encampment. As the storm came nearer and nearer, with the awful roar
of destruction, suddenly an appearance, like an elephant’s trunk,
dropped down from the clouds above and swung around the circle of
tents, throwing down seventy-five good-sized trees. Wife and a
Baptist sister were washing dishes in the Buffalo tent. They were
giving each other their experience. Said the Baptist sister: “If I
should die this moment, I’m saved.” No sooner had she said that than
a tree nearly two feet in diameter was blown down from the inside of
the circle of tents, going directly over the Buffalo tent, crushing
it down, and with it the Baptist sister. All that saved the dear
wife from the same fate was our little two-year old girl, hearing
the noise of the storm, went to the tent door to see what the matter
was, the mother going in great haste after her, escaped having the
tree fall upon her. It was a narrow escape. There was only a step at
that time between her soul and death. The Baptist sister was killed
instantly. She had no sooner declared that she was ready to die, than
she was ushered into eternity! How important it is to always be ready.

This awful scene caused many to turn pale with alarm for their future
condition. Eternity seemed so near. Every one on the ground felt the
importance of being saved, having a clean heart. They did not need
much urging to commence the work in right good earnest. Among the
many that were made wise by this awful storm and were at the altar
seeking, in the very depths of humility, the blessing of perfect
love, was my dear wife. She, with others, did not seek in vain. She
found the blessing. She went down on the line of confession, and was
mightily resurrected to a state of heart purity, by a living faith in
the Almighty power of Christ to save. It was stated to me by those
that were present, that the whole camp-ground shook when she struck
the Rock! _Glory to God!_

At this time I was at a camp-meeting in another part of the state
helping Bro. William Cooley. Hearing of the great blessing that my
wife had received, I concluded that it would not be necessary for me
to take another long trip, to go home to see if I could not persuade
her to come with me, but that she would immediately pack up and move
on to the big circuit with me, which, thank God, she did. But O, how
changed! I had emphatically a new wife. I had always thought her the
best woman on earth; now I knew that she was. We then saw eye to eye
in the great work to which God had called us. And O, how precious the
communion we had with each other and the Lord, during her brief stay
on earth after this occurrence. In less than two years she peacefully
passed away to be forever with the Lord.

I relate this circumstance to show what things we have to overcome
sometimes, in order to enter the ministry. And then, how strangely
God manages to bring us where our eyes may be opened to see just what
he wants us to see. It is well expressed by the poet:

                “God moves in a mysterious way,
                   His wonders to perform,
                 He plants his footsteps in the sea,
                   And rides upon the storm.”

More than a quarter of a century has passed into eternity since most
of the events narrated occurred; and in looking over the past, and
the way in which God led us into the ministry, the trials, conflicts,
victories, and the many times in which He has marvelously delivered
us out of the hands of all our enemies, and brought to our aid
reinforcements, and just the help needed, and just at the right time,
our heart goes out in wonder, love and praise.

The promise of the Lord to me was: “For as much as ye know that your
labor is not in vain in the Lord.” O, how comforting that Scripture
has been to me. When on hard fields of labor, and when it seemed
as though very little if anything, accomplished, the above word of
the Lord would come to my heart with such an assurance, and in such
sweetness that I have been made to rejoice in the goodness of the
Lord to me.

We are often placed in a position, allowing the world to judge, would
call it a tremendous defeat. But in obeying the voice of God there
is no defeat. We may not always see just what we have done, the good
accomplished. Perhaps it is best we should not. Spiritual pride might
find way into our heart and destroy us.

The command is, “Go forward.” We are not to stop to analyze results,
in order to get at exact accomplishments, but move on, laboring
with all our might, and leaving results with God. In that day,
and under the light of judgment fires, it will appear in all the
grandeur of eternal blessedness. “Your labor is not in vain in the
Lord.” What precious opportunities God has given us of laying up our
treasures on high. Look out in what direction you may, the fields
are white already to harvest. Golden opportunities for doing good,
and getting good, are constantly placed within our reach, and to be
like our divine Lord and Master, who went about doing good, so must
we, looking mainly for our reward in that day when He shall come to
make up His jewels. O how blessed to hear in that day, “Well done!”
Notwithstanding the glittering crown that often seems so nigh to the
Christian soldier, he feels as expressed in the following lines:

              “Let me stay; I fain would labor
                 In the vineyard of the Lord;
               For the fields are ready whitening,
                 Jesus says so in His word.
               Let me thrust the Spirit’s cycle,
                 In the fields already white;
               Let me blow the Gospel trumpet;
                 Let me do with all my might.

               Let me stay and wear the armor
                 That my Father doth supply;
               Let me cheer the broken hearted,
                 Help the pilgrim on his way.
               Let me point the poor and needy
                 To a boundless store of grace,
               To a mansion in the heavens,
                 Where the weary are at rest.

               Let me stay and warn poor sinners
                 Of the danger they are in,
               While by Christ they’re unprotected,
                 Foes without and fears within;
               Let me tell how Jesus loved them
                 When he died upon the tree,
               When he cried in grief and anguish,
                 ‘Why hast Thou forsaken me?’

               Let me stay a little longer,
                 Gathering for the garner great,
               Golden sheaves, oh, precious jewels,
                 Stars in Jesus’ crown complete.
               Let me finish all my labor,
                 Then my armor I’ll lay down,
               And with Jesus Christ, my Saviour,
                 Ever wear a starry crown.

               Then I’ll range the fields of heaven,
                 And with angels ever sing:
               Hallelujah! glory! glory!
                 Hallelujah to my King!
               Then with white-robed seraphs worship
                 Round the Father’s great white throne;
               Always crying, Thou art worthy!
                 Oh my God, and Thou alone.”

I apprehend that the richest spot in heaven will be given to those
that have lived the nearest to Christ while on earth; that have been
instrumental in turning many from darkness to light; that have been
one with Him in the great work of human redemption; that have borne
the cross, labored incessantly to bring souls to Christ and build
up His kingdom on earth. It may have been in poverty, amidst great
suffering, of physical ailments, in persecution; but the joy to such
on earth exceeds that of all others; and in the world to come, “They
shall shine as the brightness of the firmament forever and ever.”




                                 VI.

                       A PARTICULAR PROVIDENCE.


How cheering to the heart of a good man to believe that God, the
Infinite, loves, and tenderly cares for all the creatures which He
hath made, and that He daily provides for, and feeds, and clothes
the teeming millions of earth. How vast the conception that the
Almighty this morning provided food for and fed, one billion, and
five hundred million of human beings; and beside the fishes of the
sea, and the birds of the air, and the cattle upon a thousand hills;
and that this care commenced when the morning stars sang together for
joy, and will continue through time, and to all eternity. He that
created us is able to provide for all our needs, and to perpetuate
our existence. It would be folly indeed, to suppose our Heavenly
Father capable of creating us, but not able to sustain us. He that
paints the lilies with rainbow tints, and covers the earth with its
carpet of green, can supply all our need in this world, and in the
world to come. Wherever in nature a real want is manifest, near by
may always be found the supply. “My God shall supply all your need.”
To doubt His ability or willingness to do this, would be sinful. The
smallest speck in creation is not lost to sight, nor removed from His
tenderest care. “Even the very hairs of your head are all numbered.”
“And if He so clothe and beautifies the grass of the field which
to-day is, and to-morrow is cut down and cast into the oven, shall He
not much rather clothe you, oh, ye of little faith.”

He sends rain and sunshine, stormy wind and hoar frost, heat and
cold, the changing seasons, causing earth to bring forth her increase
for the sustenance of man and beast. Away back in by-gone ages,
doubtless, the creator of this vast universe provided, or made ample
provision for this earth and all its dependencies. I seriously doubt
if a mistake was made or any need that might arise in any member of
the human family, but that was thoroughly considered and all needful
supplies provided for. “Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow
not, neither do they reap nor gather into barns; yet your Heavenly
Father feedeth them. Are ye not much better than they?” Why then
so much suffering, famine, pestilence, war, murder, and the great
amount of evil arising from intemperance? These are all the results
of sin, not the penalty for sin, but the legitimate fruit of sin;
and God has provided a complete remedy for all the ills which flesh
is suffering because of sin. Wherefore, He is able to save us to
the uttermost, and to present us faultless before His presence,
with exceeding joy. Suffering and need may be employed at times as
a corrective agency, and in all these things we should learn wisdom
and abandon all wrong doing and learn to do well. We read of some
that were always learning, and never coming to the knowledge. Perhaps
nearly all Christian men and women would endorse in a general way,
God’s providential care over His children, but doubt His special
providences. Nevertheless, He does hear and answer prayer for special
blessings.

When Peter was in prison prayer was offered for him, which God
heard and answered, sending an angel to unlock prison doors,
calling Peter’s attention to the fact that deliverance had come;
and in obeying the command, his chains fell off, and those massive
doors, seemingly of their own accord, swung back, and he following
his guide, was a free man, walking at liberty. When Israel had
been scourged for three years and six months by a severe drouth,
Elijah petitioned the Lord for help, special help! Rain, was the
all-absorbing need at that time, and blessed be the Lord Almighty
that hears and answers prayer, rain came in great abundance. Every
answer to prayer, whether it be for soul or body, is a special
gift or blessing from our God. But in every case, there must be on
our part, a _special need_, and faith must be normal, believing,
trusting, without any reserve whatever. If you have the reserve of
a big farm, or bank stock, or cash in abundance at your command, it
will greatly hinder your faith! hence, those in the ministry blessed
with such means, never reach such depths of richness of experience,
as those that are compelled by force of circumstances to trust alone
in God. Ministers that have means to fall back on if things do not
move to suit them, generally in a pinch, fall back _on means_! God
has nowhere in His Word promised to supply all we want, but all we
need. If a man is not sick, he does not feel much on the subject of
being healed. If he is well clothed and housed he does not feel the
need of clothes and shelter. If he is well supplied with food, or can
at _will_, put his hand on the greenbacks, he does not have a very
big feeling of need.

This class of characters never become spiritually educated up to the
supreme summit of implicit trust in _Jehovah_. In order to prove the
great Fatherhood of God, there must be on our part a consecration
that is not only in word but in deed, and in truth, embracing
all we have, all we are, all we ever expect to be, and a divine
consciousness of the complete transfer made of all to Christ, and His
Spirit with our spirit bearing witness to this holy transaction; then
the heart will sing:

                 “Forever here my rest shall be,
                    Close to Thy bleeding side;
                  This all my hope, and all my plea,
                    For me the Saviour died.”

For nearly thirty years the author of this, has been like the birds
of the air, trusting entirely in the Lord, for soul and body; and
often blessings have come that were needed, when it seemed as though
a miracle must be wrought in order to supply the demand.

When I came into the Susquehanna Conference, there were just four
circuits: Rose and Clyde, Nelson and Fenner, Binghamton and Union and
New York City. It was emphatically a missionary field. I left what
seemed to be a good paying business, to preach the Gospel in this
new conference. Although our work was largely among the poor, yet
God marvelously cared for us, in providing for our souls and bodies.
Blessings came at times when greatly needed, as direct from God as
the manna that fell in the wilderness to satisfy God’s ancient people.

The last year that my now sainted companion was on earth, we were
far away from markets. Her desire for food was very fluctuating.
Occasionally she would want some kind of food that seemed impossible
to obtain; but whenever she expressed a desire for any kind of
food, it came. One morning I asked her what she could eat if we had
it. She replied, “I could eat a brook trout, if I had it.” My son,
Lester, then about fourteen years old, was attending school in the
place where we then lived. At recess he went back a little way from
the school house, where was running a little brook, the outlet of
springs: He saw therein a remarkably fine trout. By some means it was
out of the main channel and could not make its escape. My son saw
the situation, and remembering what his _sick_ mother had said in
the morning, marked the spot, and as soon as school closed he took
the fish up to his mother. As soon as she saw it she recognized the
hand of the Lord, and with a heart full of love and gratitude, and
eyes sparkling with tears, we unitedly joined in thanking God for
the supply so much needed. On another occasion during her sickness,
when asked what she would like to eat if we had it, she replied: “I
could eat some lamb, if I had it.” It was in the month of March, and
it did not seem as though such a thing could be had short of New York
City. A farmer living some three miles away, had five lambs that were
born in December or January. They were very nice and highly prized
by their owner. The day my companion expressed a wish for lamb, the
owner was moving them from one stall in his barn to another; one
accidentally broke its leg; so the farmer was compelled to kill and
dress it. While at this work and feeling very bad, he said a voice,
as plain as human voice, and a good deal more impressive, said: “Take
part of this lamb to Sister Osborne,” which he did. Praise God!

The next circuit that we occupied was Seneca Falls, Auburn, Owasco,
Niles and Canandaigua. I felt that God wanted me to live at Seneca
Falls. My chairman thought that I had better settle at some other
point, as the Seneca Falls pilgrims were very poor and discouraged.
We went to Seneca Falls on Thursday, met the pilgrims at Sister
McKee’s. I think there were less than a dozen poor, discouraged ones.
They received us with not a little indifference, and were sure that a
house could not be found anywhere in the place. They said that others
had been there looking for houses, but could find none. However, they
were going to _leave it all_ with the Lord. In this they were like a
great many that I have met with, awful willing to let the good Lord
do it all. They really believe that Jesus paid it all, consequently,
let Him do it all.

This did not disturb my convictions that God wanted me to live there,
and that He had a house for me at that place. I prayed much that
night, and as Friday morning dawned upon us I felt all through my
being that in such a part of the town there was an _empty house_,
and that I could hire it. I knew but little of the place, but
after prayers I started off in the direction of the _empty house_,
according to my conviction. I came to that part of the town indicated
by my feelings. I met a lad and said to him, “Where is that house
where the family moved out a few days ago?” Said he, “Right around
the corner.” I moved on a few rods when I met another boy and made
the same inquiry of him. He replied, “That house across there.” It
was really a neat house owned by a merchant’s wife, they occupying
the wing part. All the upright part, consisting of seven neat rooms,
she wanted to rent until spring. Inside of ten minutes I made a
bargain for the house, paid one month’s rent, and the next week we
moved in and remained there for two years. We had the house for six
dollars per month, when a great many others wanted it and would have
paid ten or twelve dollars per month.

I want to say a little more about this affair, as it was so clear
a case of the Lord’s doings; as clear as when Peter was led out of
prison by the angel of God. I thought so then. I think so now, after
the lapse of nearly twenty-five years, and look back to that event
with the profoundest feelings of love and veneration for the special
leadings of the Spirit of the Lord Jesus at that time, and all the
way since. A gracious revival commenced from the very beginning of
our ministry at that place. As we commenced house-keeping right away,
I appointed a meeting for holiness at our house. In my notice of the
meeting I excluded all that did not want something special of the
Lord. The meeting was good and lasted until after ten o’clock. We had
quite a struggle for a lady that came there expressly for her soul’s
salvation. She finally came through with a tremendous shout, and
this she continued for some time. I had a sort of feeling that these
shouts greatly disturbed my landlady in the other part of the house.
Immediately after breakfast the next morning she sent for me to come
in, she wanted to see me. As soon as I entered she looked me square
in the face and stated in very emphatic language that I must procure
another house immediately. Said she, “I did not let you have my
house for public meetings. I cannot and will not have such confusion
in my house. It was perfectly ridiculous--such a noise--such a
pow-wow--husband and I did not sleep a wink all night, you must move
right out.” I looked her steadily in the face and said nothing until
she had spent her force, and then made my statement. I knew my rights
and purposed to stick to them. I said, “True, Mrs. Ingmire, you
did not rent me your house for public meetings; it was not of that
class--it was a select meeting. I stated from the pulpit that none
need come except those that wanted something from the Lord. It was a
meeting for holiness. You know the Methodists believe in that. (She
was a Methodist.) We believe in being good--like our Master, who went
about doing good to the souls and bodies of men.” I then referred to
that poor widow that God converted last night; what a hard time she
had, caring for five little children, working late at night and early
in the morning with but little to eat and poorly clad and without the
comforts of salvation. I saw that she was deeply interested in my
talk, and that I had the inside track. At this point I said, “Let us
pray,” at the same time dropping on my knees, I commenced praying for
God to bless the work at Seneca Falls, and especially my landlady.
She knelt while I prayed. The good Lord heard and answered prayer.
When I came to the Amen, she responded, Amen. We arose. She said
with tears rolling down her face, “God bless you, Brother Osborne, I
believe the Lord sent you here; I think you will do good here; just
the man needed.” I assured her that God sent me there, and that I
meant to do good, and bade her good morning. No more was said about
our leaving the house, but they made much effort to keep us there;
and when the first year was up, they circulated a petition for our
being returned the second year. We remained there two years and God
gave us a continuous revival. For weeks souls were saved in every
meeting at Seneca Falls, and at every point on this circuit we had a
revival.

                   “God moves in a mysterious way,
                    His wonders to perform.”

The people that we were laboring with and for, were very poor,
so that we were compelled to pray the Lord’s prayer daily: and
blessed be the name of the Lord, He fed and clothed us. It would be
impossible to tell the many peculiar ways that God had in supplying
our needs. On one occasion my entire suit of wearing apparel had
become badly worn and looked decidedly seedy. My coat was so feeble
that it would not hold together under the arms, though wife had
darned it much, and every time that I would raise my hand, when
preaching, there would be an exhibition of cotton, which somewhat
annoyed me. I prayed over the matter. I believed that God would
supply my need. I said, “Lord, thy servant ought to be in a
presentable shape.” It did not seem to me that in a country like
ours, where there was such an abundance on every side, that God
wanted me to go dressed so poorly. After much care, and thought and
prayer, I called at the Post Office and received two letters. I did
not open them until I reached home. My first letter contained a fifty
dollar post office order. It seemed as if I could not believe my own
senses. Tears of gratitude so filled my eyes that I could hardly read
for the time being, while the Spirit said, “This means an entire
suit of clothes.” Of course this sent afresh the doxology coursing,
vibrating and thoroughly permeating all of our redeemed powers. O,
how precious it is to live where God feeds and clothes the body and
satisfies our immortal nature with Himself. Well might the poet sing--

                 “O for such love let rocks and hills
                    Their lasting silence break.”

Every law governing this vast universe, with all its intelligencies,
are under the direct control of our Heavenly Father. Nothing is lost
to His sight. “If I ascend up into Heaven, Thou art there; if I make
my bed in Hell, behold Thou art there. If I take the wings of the
morning and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there shall
Thy hand lead me, and Thy right hand shall hold me. If I say, Surely
the darkness shall cover me, even the night shall be light about me.
Yea, the darkness hideth not from Thee; but the night shineth as the
day; the darkness and the light are both alike to Thee.”

Every effect has its own legitimate cause. It is not necessary that
we should understand perfectly the law governing cause and effect in
order to have implicit trust and confidence in God. Things about us
may have a strange and a very forbidding appearance, yet we are to
get good out of all the events of life. “All things work together for
good to them that love God.” This will keep the soul cheerful and
make life a pleasant pilgrimage. Having this constantly before our
minds, that God directs or permits all of life’s operations; and all
for His glory, and the eternal well being of His dear children. Glory
to God and the Lamb forever! “Heaven and earth would sooner pass
away, than one jot, or one tittle, of His law, should fail.”

We believe God; the uncreated, that was, from everlasting, to
everlasting; that was, away back in the eternal solitudes of nature.
With this profound mystery before us, and mysteries all along the
way, we have the revealed will of God before us, which makes the
way so plain, that, “The wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err
therein.”

How numerous the cases where God’s special providences have been made
manifest in delivering, in the time of great danger; in sustaining
in the time of drouth and famine; when wasted and worn by disease.
Truly, our God, is a present help, in time of need.”

In the fall of 1871 we were sent by our conference, and we believe
by the Lord, to Philadelphia, Pa. We had felt, through the summer
preceding, that we ought to go there in the fall. We arrived at our
destination, and at Bro. Overing’s about 6 o’clock P. M. As we sat
down to tea, soon after our arrival, Sister Overing said to me, “Bro.
Osborne, did you know that the small pox was very thick in this part
of the city?” I said, “No!” I then asked, “How long has it been at
work here?” She said, “About three months.” Immediately my appetite
for food left me, as suddenly as the unwelcome news approached me. I
arose from the table without tasting of any food--powerfully tempted.
The enemy said to me, “You see now what a fool you have made of
yourself. You have brought your family here to die of the small pox.”
I thought for a few moments that I should sink. I found my way into
the parlor and then into a bed-room. I fell on my knees and cried
unto the Lord. I told the Lord that I came there in good faith, and
I could not bear to have my family all destroyed by the small pox.
While on my knees the Lord telephoned me in these words, “No plague
shall come nigh thy dwelling.” I recognized the communication as
coming from my Heavenly Father, and immediately replied in these
words: “Yea, Lord, be it unto Thy servant according to Thy word.” The
burden rolled off and I felt as secure all the year from that moment,
as though pestilence and death were not in the city. It spread
until every part of the city was scourged with small pox. Hundreds
died every week with it, and thousands during the year. Wife and I
visited those that were sick. Almost every day I was in a small pox
procession; and all through the year I felt perfectly secure from all
of its destroying power.

Thus was God’s special providence made manifest in this fearfully
alarming time of pestilence and death. Some two hundred thousand
left the city in fearful alarm and dismay. At another appointment
where our people were very poor and very much scattered, a rich man
was saved and joined the feeble band. He agreed that if conference
would let me stay with the poorest part of the circuit the second
year, he would support the work, if it cost a thousand dollars, and
beside, he would build a church for the pilgrims. This, doubtless he
would have done, had he lived. He died soon after conference, having
paid but one hundred dollars, leaving us to trust alone in God for
our support. The house that we occupied was sold so that we were
compelled to find another. There was just one house to be rented in
the place for six months, the balance of the conference year, and
this was owned by a hard-fisted landlord, and he wanted his rent
monthly in advance. What could I do? I had nowhere to look for help,
but to God alone. I must have a house, and get out of the one I then
occupied, or be turned into the street. What a dilemma! How it would
look to have a Free Methodist preacher, with wife and children,
as good as ever graced the earth, turned into the street, because
_why_? I seemed to be forced to bargain for the house, and agree to
pay monthly in advance. The price was eight dollars per month. These
were days of sore trial and anxious care. Much time we spent on our
knees with strong crying and tears before God for the salvation of
souls, food and shelter. Three days before we were to make our first
payment, just the amount came, and we secured the house. Money came
so that we were able to pay our rent always on time, and with two
exceptions, it came three days before time. This has not always been
the case, when we have trusted in boards, official or otherwise. But
when we have been shut up alone with God, we have fed on the good of
the land--the finest of wheat, with honey out of the Rock.

A few years later on, we were shut up for trust, to a large official
board. They managed the parsonage, or hired one, and were responsible
for the rent, and we supposed that everything was moving along
grandly--when one morning I was called out by an officer of the law,
and then he read a paper stating that three months rent was due, and
unless it was paid immediately, I was to be thrown into the street,
kit and cargo. This hard-hearted landlord said to me when the bargain
was made for the house, “the garden is good for nothing.” It was a
large one, but it had not been worked in ten years; it had grown up
to weeds and thistles, year after year, so I need not expect anything
from that source.” I thought, how bad it would look to have the
preacher’s back yard covered with weeds and thistles. I made up my
mind that I would not let the weeds grow. I would have it plowed and
worked--if no more. After it was plowed, I was impressed to plant it,
which I did. I spent quite a little time in working my garden. The
Lord wonderfully blessed it, so that it was the best in the place.
I worked it with hoe and axe. This I had to do right after it had
rained. I made up my mind that my field could be made fruitful if
well worked, with God’s blessing. I have often heard it said that
such places were so hard, that nothing could be done. They meant
Spiritually. All such expressions indicate a small amount of faith.
They seem to forget that “_all things are possible with God_,” “_and
to him that believeth_.”

Our work has been largely of the faith mission character, and
wherever the ministry and laity have gone forth in that spirit,
victory has crowned their labors. Much has been said and written
about India and Africa’s faith missions, but too little about home
faith missions. Is faith needed in those darkened lands for the
salvation of the heathen? much more is mighty faith needed for the
cultured heathen of America. “_O, breath of Heaven, come on us, that
these dry bones may live._” I am satisfied that too many of us, have
too little faith in the Almighty. We do not seem to take into our
minds the fact, that, all power in Heaven, and earth belongs to Him,
and He that spake world’s from nought, could, if necessary, create
unnumbered worlds for the accomplishing of His designs in saving the
human family.

Remember, O, remember precious soul, that with every felt need, your
loving, Heavenly Father has the blessing in readiness, waiting for
your contending faith to claim it!

       “Though troubles assail, and dangers affright,
        Though friends should all fail, and foes all unite,
        Yet one thing secures us, whatever betide,
        The promise assures us, ‘_The Lord will provide_.’

        The birds, without barn or storehouse, are fed;
        From them let us learn to trust for our bread;
        His saints what is fitting shall ne’er be denied,
        So long as ’tis written, ‘_The Lord will provide_.’

        When Satan appears to stop up our path,
        And fills us with fears, _we triumph by faith_;
        He cannot take from us, (though oft he has tried.)
        The heart-cheering promise, ‘_The Lord will provide_.’

        He tells us we’re weak--our hope is in vain;
        The good that we seek we ne’er shall obtain:
        But when such suggestions our graces have tried,
        This answers all questions, ‘_The Lord will provide_.’

        No strength of our own, nor goodness we claim:
        Our trust is all thrown in Jesus’ name;
        In this our strong tower for safety we hide;
        The Lord is our power, ‘_The Lord will provide_.’

        When life sinks apace, and death is in view,
        The Word of His grace shall comfort us through:
        Not fearing or doubting with Christ on our side,
        We expect to die shouting, ‘_THE LORD DOES PROVIDE_!’”




                                 VII.

                          A PECULIAR PEOPLE.


The elect, the Chosen of God, those who are ordained unto life
eternal, are God’s peculiar people; they were in the past, they are
now, and will be for all time to come. Hear the declaration of Holy
Writ:

“Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice, indeed, and keep my
covenant, then ye shall be a _peculiar people_, or treasure, unto me
above all people, for all the earth is mine.--Ex. 19:5. For thou art
a holy people unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord hath chosen thee
to be a _peculiar people_ unto Himself, above all the nations that
are upon the earth.--Deut. 14:2.” Then in 26th chapter and 18th verse
the same thought is expressed: “And the Lord hath avouched thee this
day to be His _peculiar people_, as He hath promised thee, and that
thou shouldst keep all His commandments.” The Psalmist caught the
inspiration and gave thought and expression in like manner: “For the
Lord hath chosen Jacob unto Himself, and Israel for His _peculiar
people_.”

Under the blazing light of the new dispensation, with a heart and
tongue all on fire with love divine, and vision turned upon the
redeemed of God, he declares what God would have us understand more
perfectly that, “Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood,
a holy nation, a _peculiar people_; that ye should show forth the
praises of Him who hath called you out of darkness into His marvelous
light; which in time past were not a people, but are now the people
of God; which had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.”

The condition rendering God’s people peculiar is of a twofold
character--internal and external, and both internal and external are
likewise of a twofold character, the positive and negative.

A person may be very peculiar, and yet be far away from God. There
is much that is odd, very odd, yea, very peculiar, connected with
some very good people which is no part of Christianity. A few years
ago I had the pleasure of attending a Sabbath School Convention of
the M. E. Church at Black River, N. Y. A part of the program was a
discussion of this proposition:

“Shall we teach the peculiarities of Methodism in our Sabbath
Schools?”

There was much said, but nothing that had any special bearing on the
subject. Rev. Mr. D---- said that he had a right to speak on the
subject, as he was a Methodist, of Methodists parents; two of his
sisters married Methodist preachers; and beside he had two brothers
that were Methodist preachers, and his father’s house was a home for
Methodist preachers. He related many pleasant things that occurred
among the preachers, and many peculiar things. He said there was one
Bro. Lovice that was often at his home, a holy man. He really enjoyed
holiness. At the table one day, mother, at the close of the meal,
took the platter containing a custard pie, passed around the table
and gave to each a piece. When she came to Brother Lovice, she said,
“My dear brother, will you have a piece of pie?” He replied, “Yes,
ma’am,” holding out both hands, and received his pie in that peculiar
way. This he related, and then said, “I believe in the peculiarities
of Methodism.” There are too many, I fear, who entertain similar
views of the qualities that go to make up what constitute a _peculiar
people_.

It is not eccentricity--though people lay much stress on that. It
is not in being careless or indifferent, to any of the claims that
God, or our neighbor has upon us; nor indifference in regard to our
personal appearance. The dress question is one of great importance.
God requires us to _adorn_ our bodies in _modest_ apparel. Now, to
meet the conditions, some things are necessary: First--The color
and quality of goods purchased. Secondly--The style or manner in
which they are made. It is not for the glory of God to have your
clothes cut and made so that all who see you would never mistrust
your clothes were made for you, but for some person of a much larger
make-up. There are some people who are real saints, but in their
manner of dress, they have no respect for the “_terms_” _modest or
adorn_. I maintain that the saints are the best-looking people the
world has got, and they ought to dress the best. Thank God, some do!
The material should be becoming, age, and condition in life, embraced
in a thus saith the Lord. In the next place, garments should be
made to fit. We should dress ourselves with care and neatness--not
slovenly, or in a careless and untidy manner. Many seem to have no
respect for the fitness of things, especially for how their clothes
fit. We should be in a presentable condition: “_adorned in modest
apparel_.” Many have lost measurably their influence for good by
their untidy, and utter disrespect of God’s requirements in the
matter of adornments.

A real saint, has the outside, and the inside of real salvation,
which renders them _God’s peculiar people_; inside, and outside,
righteousness. It consists first, in having our sins taken from
us--removed as far as the east is from the west, so that it has no
more dominion over us, having our inner being washed and set free
from all the remains of the carnal mind. This is preceded by a real
death to carnality--a death which too few experience, but necessary
in order to prove the heights and depths of love divine.

It is to be so dead to sin and self, that we shall be just like clay
in the hands of the potter, fashioned by Him as he wills and we
lovingly submit and say, “Thy will be done, O, Lord! my God, and my
Redeemer.”

To be a peculiar people, means _death_ to the tricks and wiles of
the devil--so that in presenting his claims with all his Satanic
art, there is no response within, but a repelling power springs up
immediately. He will tempt you to disbelieve in Jesus Christ, that
is, don’t expect Him to save you so thoroughly as some claim. He will
persuade you if possible to tone down a little; but with this death,
and this resurrection power, you are more than a match for him.

He will follow you all the way down to death. Everywhere he will
present his claims, and with the least possible chance, he will
overcome you.

We are not above our Master. The world, with all its grandeur, will
make its demands. As Christ was tempted to bow the knee, so will it
be with us. The flesh will clamor for indulgencies, but the child of
God that is dead indeed to sin and alive to Him, will overcome by
the word of their testimony and the blood of the Lamb. The internal
evidence that you are one of that family, _a peculiar people_, is
grandly pronounced in the following manner:

The first noticeable manifestation after you have made clean your
escape from the land of bondage and destruction, will be a _state of
peace_ that will thrill your entire being. This will appear strange,
after the awful conflict that you so recently passed through. Coming
into a state of reconciliation--everything about you will seem to be
in a lovely mood. As you move on in the divine life, this state of
joy and gladness will increase, so that your _peace_ will flow as a
river; and as you continue faithful in the grace already given, you
will soon have what the Psalmist called “_Great peace_.” “_Great
peace have they which love thy law, and nothing shall offend them._”
That is, if you are sanctified wholly, made perfect in love, you
have a peace that will not stumble over anything that may occur;
the ungodly things that are on all sides will not turn you out of
the direct way to Heaven. Everlasting joy belongs to this people;
it comes natural to them, as rays of light from the sun, or as rain
from the clouds. The command is, “Rejoice evermore.” This would be
impossible without a pure heart and a holy life. “The redeemed come
to Zion, with songs and with everlasting joy upon their heads; they
shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee
away.”

While the saints all have joy, they do not all have the same degree
of joy; neither will they in the world to come. St. Paul says that
“one star differeth from another star in glory. So also is the
resurrection.” Holy joy is like a musical scale, with its added
lines. Every note of praise has its positive, comparative and
superlative development. The first note of holy joy that will be
discovered in us will be in singing the songs of Zion. The redeemed
come with songs; and yet there may be the joy, not only of the
justified believer, but of the wholly sanctified. Glory to God. While
this may be true, not all that sing the songs of Zion are blessed
with this holy, triumphant joy. Only the redeemed have it.

The second degree of joy, in the natural scale, will be found in
the hearty amen; especially if it be born of the Spirit. A great
many amens were never born of the Spirit; they are counterfeits.
How blessed are the sanctified amens. How rich the service that is
well interspersed with them. The amen corners in our churches are
of inestimable value; as much so as the Urim and Thummim in the
Mosaic dispensation. It clearly revealed the presence of the Most
High; so do the spirit-inspired amens. How encouraging the unctious
amens to the saints. How it lifts the preacher while proclaiming the
everlasting gospel. Oh, that God would baptize the church with more
sanctified, Holy Ghost amens.

The note of praise running still higher in the scale of holy joy will
be, “Praise the Lord.” How little we hear of this, to what we ought
to hear. But as we advance in the divine life, the praises of God
will increase in our hearts, and upon our lips, and we shall feel
like saying: “Let everything that hath breath praise the Lord.”

The next higher note of joy will be “Glory.” This will spring up so
natural if you occupy just the right spot on the scale of experience.
You cannot pump it up, if the well is dry. There must be living water
in the well. Jesus said, “The water that I give you shall be in you a
well of water springing up unto everlasting life.”

As you ascend the mount of holiness, the next higher note struck will
be “_Hallelujah!_” This note is sweeter than honey and the honey
comb. In order to understand music on this key, you must live in
the promised land. Thus far in the scale of everlasting joy we have
language to express in a very faint degree the heaven that reigns
within. But there comes a condition in our onward flight when all
the language employed by mortal beings fail to express the joy that
floods the soul. St. Paul, master of the Greek language, which is
said to be very expressive, could not give it in that, so, doubtless,
he gave it in the language employed by angels. “For,” says the
Apostle, “Believing, ye rejoice with joy which is unspeakable and
full of glory.” That must be a little of the bliss that we shall know
when we surround the throne; bliss without alloy; joy unspeakable
and full of glory. “The joy of the Lord is our strength.” God grant
that the reader and the writer may have a great deal of this joy,
regardless of the outer manifestation.

But in this condition of salvation, there will be outer
manifestations; outer developments. Life is not an even spun thread.
Rivers are not all the way through, the same, width and depth. The
earth is not a dead level--a vast prairie--not all hill--not all
valley, but a variety. The beauty of creation, is this endless
variety. Who could bear to gaze forever on a vast plain, or mountain
scenery? I believe that Heaven will be made up of change. It will
take all of eternity to develop God’s creative power. It is true,
there will be some general features that will abide; it is so with
Christian life; but outwardly there will be new developments, new
manifestations.

“Good works,” will be the most marked, demonstration. This people are
“zealous of good works.” The work of beneficence occupies a large
place with all that truly belong to Jesus. In this they will be
like Him, who went about doing good to the souls and bodies of men;
feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting the sick, and so far
as we have the power, helping in every legitimate way:

               “The voice of charity is kind,
                  She thinketh nothing wrong--
                To every fault she seemeth blind;
                  Nor vaunteth with her tongue.
                ’Tis not to pause when at the door--
                  A shivering brother stands:
                To ask the cause, what made him poor!
                  Or why he help demands.”

Christian men and women are stewards for God. Their income, after
economically providing for their own needs, goes for God’s cause.
How this cause would move, if all that profess to be disciples of
Christ, were thus actuated. The secret of living where the great
Shechinah will shine full-orbed upon your soul; where, not a cloud
will arise to intervene for a moment, to darken the soul’s vision,
comes when you are under, and daily bearing the cross. What blessed
opportunities are presented daily, for denying self, and making glad
hearts which have long been in the deepest sorrow, and affliction.
How we may cheer the broken-hearted, if we will, and help the pilgrim
on his way.

The very best investments come on this line. But woe to him that
is greedy of gain, that is constantly seeking to lay up treasures
on earth where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break
through and steal. “Whatsoever a man soweth, that, shall he also
reap,” is the fiat of fate; the unchangeable law of Him that made and
controls all things on earth, and in Heaven.

This people will have another class of manifestations, peculiar and
marvelous. When the Holy Ghost comes on an individual, as it will,
when a complete surrender has been made, there will be at times,
visible evidences of that fact. This manifestation will not be the
same with every individual, neither will it be always the same with
the same person. The Spirit’s operations are differently presented;
some will fall--others will laugh--some will cry--run--jump--shake as
with the ague--shout--praise God--sing--and in various peculiar ways,
God the Holy Ghost will manifest Himself. This has been the condition
of things in the church of God from the beginning down to the present
time when the church has been alive in Him, earnestly seeking to do
His will. But when a church is dead--plucked up by the root--cold,
frozen, stiff, formal, backslidden, why, then they have things
“_decently, and in order_.” There are lots of churches in these days
that, a legally constituted amen, would give them all a severe run of
fever!

I suppose that if David, the King of Israel, should come to worship
with you as he worshiped before the ark, dancing with all his might,
you would have him stop, or put him out. I have no doubt but that you
would set as umpire and cry out fanaticism, wild-fire.

_Jesus_, on his triumphal entry into Jerusalem, was followed by
the crowd; the children that were there worshiped Him, crying out
Hosannah to Jesus, the King of Israel! The old Pharisees then
acted just as they have ever since when God blesses His children,
requesting them to stop their noise. Jesus gently reproved them in
the statement made. Said He: “If these should hold their _peace_,
the stones would cry out.” How this truth has been verified again
and again. When one people stop praising God in the way the Spirit
directs and operates, then another is raised up to take their place,
thus it has ever been. The Free Methodist church was raised up to
take the place made vacant by others, to offer the tribute of praise
in its various moods and tenses to the Lord Almighty. Beware how you
put your hands on the Ark! Death comes on that line. “_Quench not
the Spirit._” Alas! the fumes of the dead killed in that way cover
the land like a malaria, and the odor in many of our churches is
stifling. O, for a breeze of salvation’s life and power on all the
churches.

But to return. The man healed at the beautiful gate by Jesus Christ
through Peter, went off leaping, and walking, and praising God. It
must have looked very strange to those who saw it. A man, lame from
his birth, performing in such a _peculiar manner_. Why did he not
after the healing power came on him, walk off quietly? Why excite
curiosity? Doubtless it was for God’s glory. If he had gone to his
home in a quiet manner, but few would have taken notice of the
circumstance; whereas leaping, and walking, and praising God, drew
the attention of the people and of those who never had known him,
to the marvelous fact, that a miracle had taken place on this man,
and while their curiosity was in lively exercise, Jesus Christ was
preached unto them as the Physician for soul and body. He wants the
glory for what He does for our souls and bodies.

The day of Pentecost was a sample day of what we might have every
day, during this dispensation, if the church wanted it and would put
herself in the same condition to receive it, and doubtless with as
peculiar, and marked demonstrations. On that occasion, it sat upon
each like a tongue of fire, and they all began to speak with other
tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance. It has been said that
some seventeen different languages were spoken on that occasion.
What other outer demonstrations there were on that occasion we are
not informed; but it is quite evident from what followed, there were
some, for Peter’s denial of the charge of drunkenness would indicate
the fact that they did take place. “These are not drunken as ye
supposed.”

In every genuine revival the church has had from the very beginning
up to the present time, powerful manifestations of God’s presence in
a way calculated to arouse the most hardened and wretched sinner to a
realization of their awful danger while in their sins, causing them
to cry out from the very depths of despair, God be merciful to me a
sinner. We often hear persons pray for the influences of the Spirit.
Under certain conditions that would be right, but what we always
need, is the mighty baptism of the Holy Ghost and fire, just as it
came on the sample day, and if I read the scriptures aright, the
promise is that God will pour out of His Spirit in this dispensation,
upon all flesh, not sprinkle us with an influence but saturate and
fill us. For He says, “Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess,
_but be filled with the Spirit_.”

_Methodism_, in the days of Wesley, Whitfield, Asbury and Peter
Cartwright, was marked by very peculiar outer demonstrations.
Falling, like the dead slain in battle, was a very common feature. At
a camp-meeting held in about the year 1803 in Kentucky, five hundred
at one time fell under the power of the Holy Ghost. “Somewhere
between 1800 and 1801, in the upper part of Kentucky, at a memorable
place called Cane Ridge, there was appointed a sacramental meeting
by some of the Presbyterian ministers, at which meeting seemingly
unexpected by ministers or people, the mighty power of God was
displayed in a very extraordinary manner, many were moved to tears,
and bitter and loud crying for mercy. The meeting was protracted for
weeks. Ministers of almost all denominations flocked in from far and
near. The meeting was kept up both night and day. Thousands heard of
the mighty work, and came on foot, on horseback, in carriages and
wagons. It was supposed that there were in attendance at times during
the meeting from twelve to twenty-five thousand people. Hundreds fell
prostrate under the mighty power of God, as men slain in battle.
Stands were erected in the woods from which preachers of different
churches proclaimed repentance toward God and faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ, and it was supposed by eye and ear witnesses, that between
one and two thousand souls were happily and powerfully converted to
God during the meeting. It was not unusual for one, two, three, and
four to seven preachers to be addressing the listening thousands at
the same time from the different stands erected for that purpose.
_The Heavenly fire spread in almost every direction. It was said,
by truthful witnesses, that at times more than one thousand persons
broke out into loud shouting all at once, and the shouts could be
heard for miles around._” The Methodist preachers that were at
this meeting possessed some of the John Wesley ability to utilize
whatever might aid in advancing the Redeemer’s Kingdom, saw in the
meeting just described a glorious opportunity, which they immediately
embraced, and out of which evolved the notorious camp-meeting
referred to in another place as a child of Methodism. Bishop
Simpson said in a sermon that he preached to a large congregation
of class-leaders at Philadelphia, Pa., from these words, “He shall
baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire,” “that the Methodists
owed their success to this baptism; and what made them peculiar was
the fire.” This was a double blessing, producing intensity of life
and action, with visible manifestations of God’s presence and power
often manifested in peculiar ways. I remember well for more than
fifty years, how the Lord graciously poured out His Spirit on our
beloved Zion. The times of refreshing, cries for mercy, the songs of
praise, the amens and the glorious Hallelujahs that I heard half a
century ago, come welling up in my soul as though it were yesterday.
I attended a quarterly meeting at Albion, N. Y., in the old brick M.
E. Church, L. Stiles pastor, in 1857. This was one of the original
meetings gotten up by Rev. B. T. Roberts, and Rev. L. Stiles. It
was a four day meeting. I had never been away from home before to
attend a meeting of this character. I had a good deal of anxiety
to know what kind of people I should see at that meeting. An old
class-leader that lived near me was on his way to that meeting with
me. Said I, ‘Brother, what kind of folks will attend the quarterly
meeting?’ Said he, ‘The very _cream_ of the church.’ As we came near
the church we could hear the saints as they met each other coming
in from the regions round about, greeting one another with ‘Praise
the Lord, I am so glad to see you, how does your soul prosper, well?
glory to God.’ Then would ring out Spirit-born amens. This was before
the meeting had commenced. I was captured by these greetings. This
meeting commenced at 9 o’clock A. M., with a prayer meeting, first
was five minutes of secret prayer. In about two minutes an old
gray-haired pilgrim got blessed, sprang up and commenced shouting
glory, Hallelujah, with what I thought, unearthly power. He jumped
to his feet and I to mine. He continued to shout, and I gazed with
wonder, and shook from head to foot as though everything around me
was moving heavenward. Very soon I got on my knees again and asked
the Lord to steady my nerves, for I felt that I must have something,
for the element around me was perfectly awful and solemn. I had
been on my knees but a short time before a Bro. in the back part of
the church sprang to his feet and with such lung power as it seemed
to me at that time I had never heard before shouted with all his
might--‘_Hallelujah_’--and this he repeated until the house was full
of glory, and of God. This was a Pentecostal meeting. Here the saints
received the baptism of the Holy Ghost and fire, fitting them up for
the awful ordeal of expulsion from their own home, consecrated by the
dearest ties of nature and grace; made dear by every recollection
of bygone days. Here in the beginning of our Christian life, were
_Spiritual fathers_ and _mothers_, who cared for us with great
tenderness and solicitude. Now, to be thrust out from our dear old
home, simply because we loved her and were trying to maintain her
rights, was cruel indeed. But God had a purpose in this, as much as
He had in the selling of Joseph into Egypt. Benjamin must be cast out
to man the LIFE-BOAT, to rescue the perishing. Nearly thirty years
has come and gone with trials, conflicts, persecutions, broadside
after broadside from the _old craft_, and other crafts, yet, the
Captain has maintained his place at the mast-head, holding high the
insignia that brought us to the front, ‘HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD.’” May
his life and health be preserved for years to come to maintain the
same work that he has so tenaciously held to in the past, amen. While
others have been raised up to help in bearing aloft the banner of
heart purity, noble men and women, our brother has not become puffed
up by great prosperity, but maintains the simplicity of the gospel as
in other days.

Rev. Amos Hard lived in the town of Murry, N. Y., five miles from
Albion and four from Holly, I lived neighbour to him. Perhaps there
was not another man in Genesee Conference that did so much to stir
up war as Bro. Hard. As a Sister remarked on the old Bergen camp
ground, “Bro. Hard is all heads and points.” His relation to his
church was supernumerary. This relation he occupied for twenty-five
years, so that he was at liberty to go and come when he pleased. It
was expected that when the Free church was organized, he would come
right in, but he did not. If he had been expelled, as others were for
doing some of the same work that he did, doubtless, he would have
come in. There was just one thing that prevented his expulsion, and
that was, his two sons that were in Genesee College. His character
was arrested several times, and the only thing that saved his head
from the axe, was his superior sons. It was argued like this, “You
expel Brother Hard, and we lose two of the smartest students we have
in the college,” and the last time that our Brother was put through
the crucible, it was added, “and the Free Methodists will get them.”
This statement I had from Sister Hard. His home was a rendezvous for
those engaged in making war on church idols.

_Much harm_ has been done to the cause of Christ by not properly
estimating religious demonstrations. Some have laid too much
stress upon them. While blessed in the past, they had peculiar
manifestations, and then come to this conclusion, that, when blessed
of God, they would always have the same outer demonstrations; and
if they did not have the same, readily concluded that they were not
right with God, when at the same time they had not knowingly grieved
the Spirit in any way. The next step with them has been to cast away
their confidence in Christ, quit doing duty and of course, they
were soon far away from the Lord. We should always hold fast the
profession of our faith, if we have not committed sin, regardless of
everything else. If we have done wrong, hasten to make it right. The
cause of Christ has suffered great damage and in many places it has
been completely smothered by those that sit in judgment and condemn
every phase of experience that does not meet their preconceived
notions of just how a person should act when blessed of God;
condemning what may seem peculiar and strange because they do not
understand it, is not wise. The Holy Spirit has been grieved, yea,
_blasphemed_ in too many cases in that way. Charges and conferences
have been greatly checked, and in some cases dried up by the root,
by harshly condemning _the Spirit’s operations_. I have no doubt but
that they honestly sought to remedy what they supposed was a serious
difficulty--greatly hindering the work of the Lord. Their efforts
were not blessed of God, and worked ruin, because they resorted to
wrong measures. I believe that the devil has power to imitate the
Spirit, especially in demonstrations. But suppose that he has? We
need be a little cautious how we give him credit. John Wesley and
others at Fetterlane fell into the same difficulty which grieved the
Spirit and brought deadness to the work at that place, and leanness
into their souls. They sought unto the Lord to know the difficulty
and God let light upon them, just as He would do by you if you are
guilty of a like offense.

Wesley and others made the following confession: “We acknowledged
our having grieved Him by our divisions; one saying, I am of Paul,
another, I am of Apollos; by our leaning again to our own works and
trusting in them, instead of Christ, by our resting in those little
beginnings of sanctification, which it had pleased Him to work in our
souls, and, above all, _by blaspheming His work among us, imputing it
to nature, to the force of imagination and animal spirits, or even to
the delusion of the devil. In that hour, we found God with us as at
the first. Some fell prostrate upon the ground. Others burst out, as
with one consent, into loud praise and thanksgiving. And many openly
testified there had been no such day as this since January the first
preceding._” (_Wesley Journal, Volume 3, page 140._)

After confessing their faults, one to another, the blessing of the
Lord came as on former occasions. Dear Brothers and Sisters in
Christ, is not the above remedy what we _need_ among us, as a people?
especially in some places. Wherever it has been tried, it proved
gloriously successful. In fact, it is the only remedy for the like
difficulties. A good square confession is always health to the soul,
it works like a charm. If you have grieved the Holy Spirit, try it.

During more than fifty years I have witnessed a great many powerful
revivals, and from what I have seen I come to this conclusion, that
it is impossible to have a revival of God’s salvation where the real
burden of the Lord will rest on Zion, so she will feel a little
as Christ felt when in the Garden, when such conviction will come
on sinners that they will see themselves and their real danger,
leading them to cry for life, without manifesting much that will be
decidedly _peculiar_. But to stop and spend, or waste time in trying
to regulate the Holy Ghost, is exceedingly foolish. You might as well
try to regulate chain-lightning as it came from the clouds. When
there is much fire in the furnace clinkers are formed, but you don’t
spend your time working at clinkers, it’s the fire you want. A great
many have tried to manage the train to suit their views of things,
but the result has been in too many cases, a fearful smashup. Others
through their blinded zeal have got on the train just in time to be
side-tracked or ushered suddenly into eternity. How many have come
into the Free Methodist church apparently with a desire to run this
train according to their schedule time, but were soon side-tracked,
or ceased to be.

God Almighty’s train must be managed according to the _old
time-table_. Jobbers--compromisers--and all that love and make a
lie, off from the track at once. But few brakemen are needed on this
train, but a premium is offered for first-class firemen. Beloveds, up
with the brakes, and let the train move on, and don’t become alarmed
if she gets under big headway.

In 1863 Brother and Sister Cooley and the writer held a camp-meeting
at Blood’s Corners, N. Y. After the Sabbath we were helped by Brother
and Sister Roberts. Brother James Matthews and others came in from a
meeting that had just closed at Akron. It was a very hard place to
run a meeting from the fact that in that section of country nearly
all professed to be Christians, when it was plain to be seen that in
most cases they were in a backslidden state if they had ever been
converted, which was doubted. Crowds came on the ground and openly
and in other ways opposed the work that we were called to do, that
was to spread “scriptural holiness.” On one occasion when Brother
Cooley was exhorting a large crowd on this subject, a local preacher
belonging to some church, jumped up and commanded Brother Cooley to
stop at once, “they did not want to hear such stuff.” Brother Cooley
paid no attention to this but continued to exhort. Then the fellow
turned on Brother C., and cried out with all his might for the Holy
Ghost to knock our brother down. This he repeated, declaring they
would not hear such talk. This was a hard fought battle field but
victory came on this wise. On Tuesday night about twelve o’clock it
was thought by a number of real saints that came on the ground from
New York City, and from Illinois, and by those that had been there
from the beginning that God could and would give the victory if we
should make a more thorough effort. Accordingly twenty or more (and
they were members of eight denominations) went into Brother Roberts’
tent and engaged in earnest prayer to this end.

Our praying was characterized by intense earnestness, all that were
in that meeting felt that way. Some took a very humble position,
especially Brother Belden of N. Y. He was a Presbyterian minister.
He confessed he had compromised, but would do so no more. He would
preach a whole gospel the remainder of his life, if compelled by
so doing to beg from door to door. It seemed to take us until four
o’clock in the morning to reach the spot where faith sprang up
claiming the Holy Ghost and the fire. At this point it came on all
in that tent. It made no difference because we belonged to different
organizations, all fell as slain in battle, except one. At this
meeting our dear Brother Roberts fell under the power of God several
times. He approached the person that did not fall to lay his hands on
their head, but when his hands came within one foot of them he fell
the quickest of any person that I ever saw fall. This was one of the
most glorious meetings that I ever knew anything about. After this
salvation flowed in upon us like a mighty river, souls were saved,
believers were sanctified wholly, and the Free Methodists struck an
abiding place at that time, and from this point it has gone out to
bless others in regions beyond. In those days we made it a point to
have the victory on all occasions. If at first we did not succeed we
would try again, let the drill go down until we struck the living
stream. There is no such thing as failure with those whose faith and
trust is in God. “This is the victory that overcometh the world, even
our faith.”

_Free Methodism_ is a child of Providence, born in due time. She
is a spontaneous production of the Holy Ghost, and all legitimate
children are made so by the same power. It cannot be learned from
any other source. A great many come in with us from other churches,
but when our machinery gets under full headway, they become alarmed
at what they see and hear and then try to adjust things to their
primary knowledge of the science. In trying to do this as preachers,
they have gotten themselves and the societies over which they were
placed into serious difficulty. Not having a natural induction into
the science of Free Methodism, they did the best they knew, but when
they should have raised the valve and let on more steam, down went
the brakes, and when faith should have been encouraged, personal
grievances were introduced. Now to illustrate--You may have carried
a watch for many years and know much about the object of a watch,
but if you were to go into a watch maker’s establishment to make
watches, you would have to commence at the very foundation in order
to know how to make a watch. It is precisely so in this science. To
work understandingly and in harmony with it, one must be born into
it, BORN OF THE SPIRIT. Our machinery is the very best ever devised,
providing that it is well worked. It must be worked in order that its
beauty and symmetry may be seen and appreciated. But if it is allowed
to go on the dry dock, it presents a forlorn appearance. It is only
when under sail with a stiff breeze, that her grand proportions are
visible.




                                VIII.

                THE FREE METHODIST CHURCH A NECESSITY.


Completeness in all the works of God are everywhere manifest. Harmony
prevails in the vast system of worlds above, and all around us.
By the aid of the telescope, we view with delight the increasing
magnitude of those heavenly bodies, from the asteroid, up to that
mysterious orb that gives life and light to the vegetable and animal
kingdoms, and the worlds that move in space. The chain is complete.
Every link is in its proper place. This is correct in both kingdoms.
You may trace with profound interest the smallest insect that crawls
upon the leaf to the giant mastodon that roams the forest. This law
prevails likewise in the kingdom of grace. As one star differeth
from another star in glory, so also is the resurrection. And when we
stand upon the sea of glass mingled with fire, and gaze upon that
innumerable company that have washed their robes and made them white
in the blood of the Lamb, the law of necessity, and development
will be manifest. Heaven would be very incomplete if this were not
true. If there were none but arch-angels and matured saints; if the
children of all grades, those just blooming into life were not there;
if men and women with the feeblest intellect redeemed to God by
the blood of the Lamb were not there, then indeed, the chain would
be broken, and Heaven would be incomplete. What joy comes to the
Christian parents, when compelled to lay their dear child, that had
already given them so much real pleasure, away in the cold silent
grave, to feel that we shall meet again, and be forever with the Lord.

We now come to a different consideration, that is, the Christian
church or churches. This is of a twofold character, internal
and external. It may have an existence where it does not appear
externally; and what often has an external appearance as the church
of Christ, may have no relation to Him. Nevertheless, it does
possess the invisible and the visible organization. The invisible
or spiritual church of Christ, is one, in Heaven, and on earth. The
visible organization is manifold. She might well be compared to a
family with many members, all striving to do the will of the parent.
All have not the same office. Every branch of the Christian church
have their mission, and will be required to do just what they are
fitted for by nature, culture, and by grace. Where much has been
given, much will be required. Responsibility measures up to the above
rule.

The whole family of churches evolved one after another from the old
Catholic church: and all, seem to have a mission in the world’s
drama. Just what that mission is, I am not able to define. Perhaps
some are to operate as parasites on others. The mission of the church
of Christ was to seek and save the lost and perishing. The Wesleyan
Methodist church declares in her book of discipline that they were
raised up to spread scriptural holiness over these lands; and while
she was true to her mission, nothing could stand before her. Where
ever she unfurled the banner of the cross, rebellion ceased, and
Jesus Christ was crowned Lord of all. At least multitudes were saved
to God and joined the ranks of the redeemed.

The doctrines of the M. E. Church were ordained in heaven, honored
of God, and blessed to the salvation of millions. Her general rules
were a strong tower; mighty bulwarks, rendering her when within that
fortification impregnable. For nearly a century she stood the assault
and rage of earth and hell without flinching, and the glory cloud did
rest upon her. But the time came when she fell; not by the mighty
invading forces without altogether, but by internal foes that she had
taken to her loving embrace. Her manner of life is entirely changed,
or nearly so. Humility has given way to pride and ostentation. The
doctrines that she once placed such stress upon, the witness of the
spirit, entire holiness, a confession of sin, restitution, plainness
of dress, she now largely ignores. Those internal foes that she cares
for so tenderly have robbed her of her Spiritual life and power.
The glory manifested during the service of preaching, prayer or
class-meeting, has in many places entirely disappeared. Beside the
enemies already mentioned, she had taken within her pale, members
that belong to speculative Free Masonry, who are opposed to Jesus
Christ and his gospel; hence, war was waged within the church by this
army of Satan, against Christ and His army, the saints. This division
of purpose by the two armies within the church was everywhere
manifest: each party, seeking for the supremacy. While the saints
held tenaciously to the ancient land-marks which our fathers set,
Satan’s wing labored to introduce the new order of things.

One of the great mistakes made by this church is in receiving members
that were never converted, but simply had a lukewarm desire to go
to heaven when they had exhausted every round of earthly pleasure.
Bishop Peck made this statement in a sermon that he preached a short
time before his death, “I am persuaded that more than three-fourths
of all the members in my beloved church, were never converted.” A
sad confession indeed; but observation proves his statement correct.
No wonder, with these elements within, our mother sought to array
herself in gorgeous apparel. What a contrast between these days of
pomp, and vanity, and worldly mindedness, and the days of blessed
memory, when arrayed in Christ’s righteousness. No wonder that there
was war in the church, when Susie and John came home from boarding
school, backslidden completely from good desires, with the new
order of things fresh in their minds, were ashamed of mother’s old
fashioned style, determined that there should be a change in the
programme. So they commenced by banging mother’s hair and putting
rings in her ears and on her fingers. The bustle, put in its horrid
appearance with extra yards of cloth, buttons, ribbons, all of which
gave our dear old mother the appearance of a stranger. Of course, she
was urged to comb her hair back as in the days of her simplicity,
and decorate herself in modest apparel, without gold, or pearls, or
costly array; but she was obstinate, and has been ever since.

The time was when the Methodists were a plain, clean, Godly class of
people. Their churches were built plain with free seats, good enough
for the rich, and none too good for the poor; and all were welcome,
rich and poor. The principle that actuated them in bygone days was,
the house of God should be as free as the gospel we preach, and both
as free as the air we breathe; and on this line the glory of the Lord
was manifest in the salvation of souls, and in the sanctification of
believers.

The new order of things brought with it a new order of church
edifices; seemingly just to accommodate the rich to the great neglect
of the poor! Of course, in all churches where the seats are sold,
a few are reserved for the poor, and for colored people. After a
poor man or woman have accepted the paupers’ seat for a Sabbath or
two, they get tempted over it, and stay away from church altogether;
when if the seats had been free, they would have continued their
attendance upon divine service, and likely been converted to God, and
made a great blessing to the church, and to the world.

It is a tremendous mistake, the practice of dedicating a church to
God, and then selling it out to whom? why, anybody that have a mind
to buy it; and in a multitude of cases, wicked, ungodly wretches
have bought the best seats in the house, giving them power over that
society, so that in ninety-nine cases out of every hundred, the
preacher in the pulpit of such churches, is gagged; some subjects
he dare not touch, because forsooth, his bread and his butter is at
stake; that because of this system, millions have been kept away from
the house of God and have perished.

One of the most embarrassing things the learned clergy of to-day have
to meet constantly is, what shall we do with this great estrangement
of the poor from the house of God?

My answer to the above proposition is, free churches throughout the
land, baptized with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, will solve this
mighty problem. This is the only solution.

_Instrumental music_ is another innovation. The music that pleases
God, is that which comes from a heart, consecrated to Him, inspired
by love divine, springing up like a fountain of life; the spontaneous
outgoings of the spirit. We must sing in the spirit, and with the
understanding also.

This part of divine service should be free to all present, not
marred by the instrument, neither by the select few. In this, we
should study to show ourselves approved unto God. I cannot believe
that He loves ignorance in the service of song, any more than in
preaching His gospel. We should aim at the greatest efficiency in all
the service rendered. This was the original plan as it came to our
fathers. But with the new order of things came the organ, and the
distressing few, to do the most precious part of divine worship.

Preaching the gospel was the means ordained of God for the salvation
of the lost, and where this is done with the Holy Ghost sent down
from Heaven, the work is accomplished. God never ordained the reading
of essays as a means to bring sinners to Christ. His prophets
anciently spake as they were moved upon by the Holy Ghost, and
success crowned their efforts.

_Carnal Amusements_ are a great hindrance in carrying forward the
work of the Lord in any church. They grieve the Spirit and cause
those that indulge in them to backslide and become worthless as
laborers in the cause of Christ.

_The Sabbath School_ should be the nursery of the church; and is,
when the salvation of the school is the primary object. When time,
talents and means are employed to that end, but if carnal amusements
are held up as the object for which they aspire, then indeed, much of
our labor will be in vain.

_Camp-meetings_ are an American institution and a child of Methodism.
Eternity alone can tell the good accomplished by these means of
grace. Thousands have been attracted to God’s leafy temple where the
greatest amount of Spiritual freedom generally prevails, especially
when ancient simplicity and earnestness prevails, because there is
always something inviting, something grand and glorious about these
God ordained gatherings. Can you imagine a place more lovely to
behold, and to enjoy, than a beautiful forest dotted with Israel’s
tents, and a company of those that are in earnest to get to Heaven?
the songs of praise, the shouts of new-born souls, and on every
side to feel that God and angels are there. Truly, such a place has
a charm for all that love the good and the beautiful. But when the
camp-meeting becomes a place for trade and speculation, a place for
visiting, for idleness and feasting, for airing one’s opinions, for
anything and everything but self-denial and earnestly seeking the
baptism of the Holy Ghost on their own souls and on the souls of
the unsaved, then the ancient glory departs, and as a substitute
culture in style, from the tent, to the magnificent cottage, the
exclamations of holy joy in the electric amen--praise the Lord--glory
to God--Hallelujah--give way to jesting, to light and trifling
conversation, and to engaging in those things that produce the most
fun. Then, indeed, it becomes necessary that another people should be
raised up to do camp-meeting work as in former days, when the glory
of the Lord rested upon this branch of Zion.

In too many cases the camp-meeting of to-day is simply a huge
Pic-Nic! I believe the real difficulty has been, and is, in failing
to preach, experience to live, and enforce sanctification, or perfect
love. This was the central _thought_ with this church, and should be
with every Christian denomination. It should tower above every other
consideration. It is true that the doctrine of holiness has become
quite popular in some directions, but that kind that contains the
cross that kills, and produces resurrection life and makes a complete
separation from all carnality, is no more popular to-day, than it was
in the beginning. This was the issue in the M. E. Church more than
thirty years ago resulting in the foundation of the Free Methodist
church. Other things came in which greatly enlarged Satan’s army,
so that on almost every occasion there was war. This continued with
increasing force until the powers of darkness were in the ascendancy,
resulting in the expulsion of some of the best the old Genesee
Conference had. This occurred in 1858. In one of Dickens’ works, I
think it is, this statement is made: “The first settlers of England
were what are now, the Welsh that occupy Wales. They were at war with
the Scots and Picts. Before this they had been harassed for a long
time by the Romans. Now the Saxon comes in and makes war upon them,
and then takes possession of the country, forcing the Britons back to
the mountains of Wales; so, ever since the Saxon have been masters of
Great Britain, Scotland and Ireland.”

This bit of history clearly illustrates the condition of our mother
church. As the Britons were driven to Wales, so Christ and His
followers have been driven out by the new order of things. Perhaps
a streak of salvation might be sandwiched in, in some country
church; or in a classroom far away from public gaze, where if the
ancient power and glory should come in, no one would be hurt. But
this order of things that the ancient power and glory should have
no more place in this church, was decreed by many in authority
nearly thirty years since, which my ears heard, and my eyes have
seen performed in the expulsion of the good and the true from that
body. During this war I became acquainted and was for a time quite
intimate with Rev. John Robie, then Editor of the Buffalo Advocate,
the organ of what was then known as “The Regency Party.” On one
occasion visiting this Brother quite a number of ministers from
this conference met in his office to do what they considered very
important business, and that was to strengthen each other’s hands
in the horrid work already begun, in expelling every one in that
conference that endorsed B. T. Roberts, Styles, and all that class
that did not stand by the new order of things. This I lived to see
accomplished, to the very letter, both in the ministry and with the
laity. They not only expelled, but they bought up and removed all
so far as they had the ability, that believed in the life and power
of salvation, or “Methodism,” as she was in the early days of her
espousals to Christ, when the glory cloud was everywhere manifest.
This work was not confined to the Genesee Conference, of making war
on those that were true to their vows to Christ and to this branch
of His church, but extended to other parts. Other Conferences are
guilty of proscription, past, and present. That the forces which
brought Methodism into existence, that gave to the world the grandest
model ever planned for the salvation of the lost, should be forced
to abandon its birthplace, is strange indeed. “Tell it not in Gath,
publish it not in the streets of Askelon!”

In this expulsion the best blood of the church was forced out; and
by the spiritual law of gravitation they came together and formed a
conglomerate, which they named, “The Free Methodist church.” It has
been called “The Free Methodist life boat.”

The organization took place in perilous times. Many societies were
being engulfed by formalism, and death. This life-boat was a timely
aid to rescue the perishing. Thousands will thank God to all eternity
for their salvation through this instrumentality. The casual observer
might have entertained grave doubts in her ability to navigate the
stormy sea of life, and cope with other crafts claiming to be engaged
in the life saving service, but presenting sails of a decidedly
different character; but no where drawing fire from the enemy,
but worldly commendation. It is true, her external appearance did
not, and does not, give to those that merely gaze upon the outer
appearance, much to hope for.

When the Ericsson Monitor steamed up Hampton Roads, rebels laughed
and our fleet were in great alarm, expecting complete destruction
by the iron-clad Merrimac. She had already destroyed several ships.
Now, what the rebels called the Yankee cheese box puts in her
appearance just in time to save the balance of the fleet from utter
destruction. The Monitor had a power out of sight that deceived those
that merely saw the outside. This is true of our beloved church. When
first launched, she was called a _Cheese_ box--a Dug-out--an old
Scow--a Theatre, and many other names she received. Nevertheless,
wherever this life-boat touched in former days she took passengers
aboard, some from the hedges, lanes, by-ways, the poor, the lame,
the halt, the blind, and many from other churches; and with former
_equipments_, rebels are taken upon all seas for King Emanuel--even
to-day.

It is an acknowledged fact, past and present, that the F. M. church
has been of untold value to all other evangelical bodies, and to
Christianity in particular--especially in the United States. It has
caused them to consider in a new light the claims that God had upon
His people, that holiness of heart and life was binding upon all. I
have heard some of the most eminent for piety and usefulness in other
churches say that above stated; and that they hoped the free church
would continue to succeed, because of the great value she had been to
them.

Her position as standard-bearer in all the moral reforms of the day,
gives her a prominent position. _Our schools_, papers, periodicals,
are all on that line. Other church papers have often used our
editorials, but did not always give due credit.

We are under great obligation to the Almighty, for the schools that
have been raised up to us; where the young may be educated in a pure
atmosphere, and from these schools many are going out to bless the
world with a richer experience; a life more completely consecrated,
educated, mentally, morally, socially, and physically. In the moral
and social rank, we claim the pre-eminence for our schools and for
our literature. There was, and there is, and there will continue to
be, a need, for a people to do just this kind of work; and while we
continue humble and obedient, God will use us to this end. “But if we
forsake Him, He will forsake us.” If we turn aside to other Gods, He
will cast us forth as a branch that is withered, and we shall be like
other nations.

_One of the most wide spread evils of the day_, filthy in all its
make up, disgusting in the extreme to a clean, well-bred person,
robbing men of their manhood, and of their mental and physical
powers, is tobacco. Forty years ago it was considered ungentlemanly
to smoke in the presence of ladies, but now, in almost every mode
of travel, on the street, in the stores, and in nearly all public
places, ladies and all are insulted by the filthy fumes of the pipe
or cigar, compounded with decayed teeth, and the deadly Upas of the
saloon, forming a drug that produces mental derangement, insanity,
crime, pauperism, poverty and shortens the life of its victims. The
use of tobacco is a bar to membership in the F. M. C. In this, she
stands supremely above all other churches. She is doing a glorious
work in making war on tobacco, and exposing its effects on the human
system. It has been said that some of our preachers were raised up
to make tobacco a specialty, as it occupied a corner in every sermon
regardless of the text. Well, suppose that is true, is it not a fact
that all reformers dwell on the thing that needs reforming? Perhaps
this class of preachers are better acquainted with this evil in its
length and breadth, and know by a blessed experience the source of
deliverance from the habit, and all longing after the same. Such
preaching is worth a great deal more than that from those who never
knew by experience the power of the habit, and the virtue of the
blood that cleanseth from all sin, and all desire for the unclean.

_Fashion brings its devotees_ into servile compliance with its most
debasing demands. Those that wear this yoke, are lost, to that which
makes humanity lovely, good and beautiful. A remark so commonly made,
“that you might as well be out of the world as out of fashion,” is
true of this class.

In adhering to this tyrant, millions of women and men have been
ruined for life. Those that have labored to live so as to equal or go
beyond certain others in matters of equipage, have been compelled to
abandon, in order to meet fashion’s demands, the honest mode of life,
and resort to fraud and speculation to obtain what their souls lusted
after.

Our jails, and portions of Canada, are largely made up of that class.
The pressure brought upon men to supply the wife and daughters with
fashion’s demands, have driven them to the lodge, the gambling hell,
the brothel--and the worst of all--the saloon! What can be more
appalling than a lady martyred to fashion? from head to foot out of
shape--distorted--compressed--pulled out--cut off in trying to fit
the fashion plate. Alas! Alas! We are imitative beings. In this the
poor ape the rich so far as they are able. If they cannot wear the
glittering gems of great value, they will decorate themselves with
shoddy finery. Is it not time to call a halt to this wicked, ungodly
mode of life? For any man or woman to come out from this style of
things, and endorse plainness in dress, and righteousness all the way
through by precept and example, requires a holy heart, filled with
love divine. And this manner of life pays bountifully in this present
world, and will in the world to come, even life everlasting. During
the past fifty years I have noticed those that the Lord blessed the
most, and were the most useful in the church and world around them,
were that class that conscientiously carried out in their lives the
Apostolic plan already referred to.

There is much connected with fashionable attire that is supremely
wicked. First, the cost of the material; secondly, precious time
spent in its making; thirdly, the wearing of such is in violation of
the word of the Lord. 1 Peter 3:3, 4. The only organized opposition
to this mode of life is the Free Methodist church. She has stood like
a beacon light for nearly thirty years, warning men and women of
their imminent danger.

_Holiness unto the Lord_--is the key to the arch that spans the
temple of the living God. It is that which gives symmetry to life and
character, a state that we enter into when the soul has been swept
and garnished by the Holy Ghost and the blood of the Lamb, which
greatly enlarges our views of Christ and His powers to save, that
brings perpetual sunshine to the soul, that makes earth a paradise,
that causes flowers to bloom in the desert, and the water of life to
spring from the flinty rock, and the heart of the needy to rejoice
with joy that is unspeakable and full of glory. It is food to the
hungry, drink to the thirsty, and comfort to the weary and heavy
laden. It is full of hope; big with immortality. Over this boundless
plain comes the odor of Eden, fresh from the throne of God. This
holiness is a state, an experience, “where only Christ is heard to
speak, where Jesus reigns alone.”

It does not reflect upon the character of others in their absence.
It is long suffering, it behaveth not itself unseemly, is not
provoked, is not puffed up, thinketh no evil, bears the burdens and
responsibilities of life meekly, rejoiceth in the truth, believeth
all that God hath said. This grace never faileth, but will shine
brighter, clearer to all eternity. You may have the tongues of men
and angels, and lack this experience, you are nothing but a sinner in
the sight of God.

A church armed with this power is more than a match for all the
powers of darkness. The first church under the gospel dispensation
were poor, uneducated men and women. They tarried at Jerusalem until
they were baptized with the Holy Ghost and with fire, and with this
blessing upon them the powers of darkness fled in dismay. Nothing
could stand before them. It was said, “ye shall receive power after
that the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be witnesses unto
me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto
the uttermost part of the earth.” This was literally true. Ancient
systems of idolatry which had grown gray with age, melted away
like the mist at noon-day as God’s army advanced, and over every
battle-field the blood-stained banner of King Emanuel was unfurled.
Deserts were made to blossom as the rose, and woods, and fields,
and rocks, and rills, all seemed to offer the tribute of praise
and thanksgiving for the wonderful display of God’s power in the
salvation of the nations round about them. This power is forever the
same, and when the church meet the conditions, it comes as on the day
of Pentecost, with visible manifestations of His presence and power
to save, “Jesus Christ the same yesterday, to-day and forever.”

I believe that the Free Methodist church was born of the Spirit. God
owns her as a legitimate child. In every place where she meets the
requirements, times of refreshing, and the salvation of souls are
reported. No church, in my opinion, so fully meet the conditions on
which the precious promises are made. She is an important _link_ in
the family of churches. May she ever reflect a certain light, live in
the experience of perfect love, be true to all the vows that she has
made to God, constantly making war upon the enemies works until every
rebel flag shall trail in the dust, and Jesus Christ crowned Lord of
all. Amen.




                                 IX.

                      DREAMS AND PRESENTIMENTS.


“Man is fearfully, and wonderfully made,” with capabilities as
boundless as eternity. This is true so far as our moral and
intellectual make up is concerned. We may grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, while this life shall last, and
forever, in the life that is to come. Progression is the law of
our being. God, who made us, has his own peculiar way of imparting
knowledge to his children, or the creatures which he hath made.

In our public school system we have the primary, and the higher
grades. It is so in the school of Christ; there is the primary, and
the higher grades of instruction. The primary grade consists in what
we learn from the schools, books, and papers. The higher grade is
confined to the teaching of the Holy Ghost. Too many are satisfied
with the primary grade, and treat insultingly the Holy Ghost. But
where He is received with loving embrace, and allowed to have his own
way, He will lead us into all truth.

Preconceived notions gathered from theological schools, very
much interfere at times with our receiving and being instructed
by the Holy Ghost. Science has done much to facilitate culture.
News gathered from all lands, comes to us with lightning speed.
The improvements of to-day annihilate time, and bridge over vast
distances. In the evening we receive the doings of the morning in
continents far away. But with all the improvements in science and
art, it cannot compete with the Holy Ghost.

The great mistake of to-day, is substituting the arts, and sciences,
and the wonderful discoveries made in Biblical literature, for the
Holy Ghost and its teachings. There is nothing that can take its
place. We can learn more, comprehend more, experience more about the
things pertaining to our spiritual and eternal well-being in a moment
of time, when under the direct inspiration of the Holy Ghost, than
can be gained in all coming time from every other source.

One pentecostal flash of the Holy Ghost on a consecrated heart, and
mind, brings intelligence that all the culture of the day cannot
fathom, nor in any way comprehend. Some people are afraid of this
power, and being led of the spirit, because individuals have been
mistaken, and were under a wrong spirit when they thought that they
were really under the influence of Christ. It is true, we may be
moved by a wrong spirit, our intellectual machinery is very sensitive
to the touch of a good, or a wrong impression.

How shall we know when an impression comes upon us, from whence it
comes? There are certain rules laid down in God’s blessed book, which
if we are careful to observe, we shall not go astray: “It will be a
lamp to our feet, and a light unto our path.” God has not set us to
navigating the broad ocean of life without chart, or compass. Thank
God, we have a chart, and the Holy Ghost to make it plain; so plain,
that the wayfaring man, though a fool, shall not err therein. The
impression that comes upon us, if it leads us to exalt Christ, it’s
all right.

The soul’s pressure that comes on all at times, may be from either
the following causes. Condemnation, conviction of sin, or an advanced
state in Christian life; temptation, or a burden for souls.

1--If it be a burden of sin, the spirit will direct us to the sin for
which we should repent.

2--If it be temptation of the devil--while he will accuse us of
something wrong, he will be very indefinite in regard to what the
thing is that we have done or have not done that was wrong. “He is
the accuser of the brethren.”

3--If the pressure that comes upon us is for an advanced state in
holiness, how our hearts will cry out after God, the living God! It
will be thus expressed--“My heart-strings groan with deep complaint,
my heart lies panting, Lord for thee; and every limb, and every
joint, stretches for perfect purity.”

While the spirit of God comes upon all men, for he said, that, it
should come to pass in the last days, “I will pour out of my spirit
upon all flesh; and one notable result would be, Dreams and Visions.”
Not all dreams are chargeable to the Holy Spirit. The mind of man
is supposed to be always in operation, though not under the control
of our judgment, or will, when the body is asleep. God does make
impressions upon our minds in our sleeping state, of things that are
coming to pass, with the person thus impressed. We are sometimes
conscious of the mind’s operations when in deep sleep; when the
spirit of the Lord may not have anything to do with it. It would seem
that God often warns poor sinners of their danger by dreams; this
being the only way seemingly, when the Holy Spirit can find way to
their heart; as then, they are quiet; the cares of life are for a
moment hushed into silence. The great difficulty in bringing sinners
to Christ, is their constant stretch after the amusements, pleasures,
and the riches of the world. So God, in his infinite love and mercy,
comes in this way to the sinner, to warn him of his danger, and the
sleeping state being the most favorable, reveals the on-coming storm.

Folger, Secretary of State, had a short time before he died, one
of those alarming dreams. Political life had worn upon him so that
he thought retirement from business, and a trip to the Bermudas
necessary in order to regain health and strength. The awful scene
presented to him in the dream completely changed his mind so that
he gave up the contemplated trip. The dream as related by his near
friends is as follows: “The steamship on which the party had taken
passage was sailing along serenely; the sea was as smooth as glass,
and everybody was happy, when suddenly a great dark cloud was
observed on the forward horizon moving rapidly toward the vessel,
accompanied by an incessant and terrific rumbling. The heavy cloud
soon reached the ill-fated craft, overspreading the sea with the
darkness of Egypt, great sheets of lurid flame shot forth in all
directions; the vessel tossed and quivered, and the sea was lashed in
mountainous billows. The Secretary saw the forms of his party and the
crew enveloped in fire, playing through the angry elements. Suddenly,
he stood alone on the deck, with the vessel sinking beneath him into
a sea of fire, and he awoke trembling like an aspen, and covered with
cold beads of perspiration, to find that it was a dream.” A short
time after this, he passed suddenly into eternity, and for aught we
know, just as he had lived, without Christ, and hope for the life
that is to come.

Job had knowledge of the revelations of dreams from God, and that
they were for divine instruction. He said, “When I say, my bed shall
comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint; then thou scarest
me with dreams, and terrified me through visions.” Nebuchadnezzar
dreamed dreams, wherewith his spirit was troubled, and his sleep
brake from him. I suppose that the King was so given up to wine,
women, and debauchery, the only time that God could make an
impression upon the wicked ruler, was when deep sleep was upon
him. God warned Abimelech in a dream, not to come near to Sarai,
“Abraham’s wife assuring him if he did, he was a dead man.”

“Jacob dreamed, and behold a ladder set upon the earth, and the top
of it reached to heaven; and, behold, the angels of God ascending and
descending on it.”

This dream was given to Jacob, doubtless to point out to him the
intercourse that exists between heaven and earth, and the connection
of both worlds by means of angelic ministry.

This doctrine is clearly taught in the old and new testament. “Are
they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who
shall be heirs of salvation?” It was probably a type of Christ, in
whom both worlds meet, and in whom the divine and human nature are
united.

The ladder was set up on earth, and the top of it reached to heaven;
for God was manifested in the flesh, and in him dwelt all the fulness
of the Godhead bodily. Jesus Christ himself, took this view of the
dream. He said to Nathaniel, “Hereafter ye shall see the heaven
opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of
Man.”

The Almighty appeared to Abraham in dreams, gave him instruction, and
very encouraging promises; assuring him of boundless prosperity, to
him and his seed, which should be as numerous as the sand of the sea,
forever and ever, which he believed, and received the honor which
comes only from God. And this honor which he received for believing
what God said to him in a dream, will pass down to the latest period
of time. O, what honor there is, in believing God, even life eternal.

God warned Laban the Syrian, to take heed to what he said to Abraham,
either good or bad. So the Lord takes care of His own. Joseph
dreamed, and he told it to his brethren, and they hated him, yet the
more, and he said unto them, hear ye the dream which I have dreamed.
For behold we were binding sheaves in the field, and, lo, my sheaf
arose and also stood upright; and behold, your sheaves stood round
about, and made obeisance to my sheaf. And his brethren said unto
him, Shalt thou indeed reign over us; and shalt thou indeed have
dominion over us; and they hated him yet the more for his dreams and
for his words. And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it to his
brethren, and said, Behold I have dreamed a dream more; and, behold,
the sun, and the moon, and the eleven stars, made obeisance to
me--and he told it to his father, and to his brethren, and his father
rebuked him, and said unto him, What is this dream that thou hast
dreamed? Shall I, and thy mother, and thy brethren, indeed come to
bow down ourselves to thee, to earth? The history of Joseph is one of
the most interesting contained in the oracles of God. It is replete
with interesting matter, from beginning to end. I presume that Joseph
knew the interpretation of his dreams when they were given. I think
that with the dreams, came the interpretation also. When others
dreamed, he knew what it meant.

What an impressive dream was that of Pharaoh, standing on the river’s
bank and gazing intently on that beautiful stream, when lo, he sees
with wonder and amazement living objects emerging therefrom. They
prove to be kine, fat-fleshed, and well-favored. And as he continued
to gaze and wonder, other sights did appear more wonderful than
the former scenes. Other kine came up from the river very lean and
ill-favored, and they devoured the fat and well-favored, and as this
scene passed he awoke. God sent an angel to warn Joseph in a dream to
go down to Egypt and stay there until He, the Lord, should send them
word to return, until the danger of Herod had passed. Pilate’s wife
warned Pilate to have nothing to do in condemning Christ, because she
had suffered much in a dream because of Him this day! I suppose that
the impression came upon her with such force and with such clearness
that Jesus Christ, that was then before the Jewish court, was the
true Messiah, the Lord of life and glory, He that came to make an
atonement for the sin of the world, and this was doubtless in her
wakeful moments. I suppose it is what would be called a presentiment.
An intuition, a knowledge of facts that will occur, or that are now
transpiring. It might be called a wakeful dream, or an inspiration.
Just as the Almighty has in the past, and does now, and will to all
eternity make known His will to the sons of men. And these divine
impressions, whether they come in our wakeful moments, or when deep
sleep is upon us, will always be in harmony with a thus saith the
Lord.

Our intellectual machinery is so wonderfully made up with receptive
powers so vast that God the Holy Ghost coming upon us, can, when it
is for his glory, impart to us more in a moment of time, than we
could receive from all other sources combined.

I remember how interested I was when passing the United States Mint
to see them stamping the stars and spread eagle on the gold coin. It
took a tremendous power to do it. So when the Almighty puts the stamp
of divinity on us, knowledge comes with power and clearness, lasting
as time. I can never forget the impression that came on me when a lad
about fifteen years of age. I was distant from home about one hundred
miles. Had been absent some four weeks. All were well when I left. I
had a brother that I loved very much, away from home at this time, I
visited him just before I left. This impression came on me as sudden
as a flash of light, and with it this thought. “There is trouble at
home and I must return as quick as possible.” The impression was
that some of the dear ones were very sick and that my presence was
greatly needed. My feelings were intense, and my mind like the needle
that points always to the pole, pointed steadily toward home as the
place where I should be. My employer did not want me to leave him
and tried to discourage me from yielding to my feelings. I could not
eat, nor sleep much. The _impression_ that was on me was painful and
for two days I suffered this intense agony before I got started for
home. The only way of traveling in those days was by stage, or the
two mile per hour on the Erie canal, or go on foot. I took each of
these modes of conveyance, and after about thirty-six hours travel,
I reached home to find a house of deep mourning. My dear brother
that I loved so tenderly was dead, and the time for his funeral had
just arrived. The people were there for the funeral service. They
had written to me but it had not reached me. I knew nothing of my
brother’s sickness and death until I was within one mile of home.
From whence came this impression that there was trouble at home, and
that I must hasten to their assistance? I know that some entertain
peculiar notions about the relation that mind sustains to mind, and
the strong sympathy that exists between such minds, and the peculiar,
invisible, and undefinable way such minds have of communing with each
other. Whatever there may be in the above philosophy, I know not.
But the impression that came to me on the above occasion I believe
was from the Lord. During my brother’s sickness he often called for
me and would say, “Has not Zenas come yet?” At this time I was not a
Christian, but a sinner, well rounded out. The promise made, “That
in the last days God would pour out of His spirit upon all flesh” is
true. I think that it came upon me at that time. Years after this
occurrence, I had another experience, quite similar to the one just
related. I was doing business for M. Tilden & Co., New Lebanon, N. Y.
I had a wife and one child at this time, and was living in Canaan,
N. Y. I had gone into the western part of the state expecting to be
gone from home some six weeks. After an absence of about two weeks,
an impression, or a presentiment, came on me with such force that I
could not work, nor eat, nor sleep, and with this impression, came
the thought that, wife, or my first born son was very sick. I had
received a letter from my wife only the day before, stating that
they were well and did not expect me home for at least six weeks.
This impression came on me about four o’clock in the afternoon. My
feelings were so intense, that I arranged my affairs, took the stage
early the next morning, rode fifteen miles, and took the express
train for Albany, where I remained all night, or the rest of the
night, as we did not reach there until eleven o’clock. That was a
night of intense anxiety, and mental suffering, for it seemed to
me that my wife or child was very sick, nigh unto death. Imagine
my feelings as I stepped from the cars on arriving at Canaan four
corners, when one of my neighbors approached me with this question,
“Mr. Osborne, is your boy alive?” The same hour of the day when the
impression came on me, my dear wife was washing, she dipped out a
pail of scalding water from the boiler, set it down, went out to
hang out some clothes. My little boy, Henry Z., went up to the pail,
pulled up his dress, and put his foot in this pail of scalding hot
water. He screamed. His mother rushed into the house, took the boy
from the pail; but oh, what a sight! The dear child’s flesh drops
off, in places, near to the bone. The boy went into spasms. The
physician had doubts of his recovery. This was an anxious time for my
dear companion; she wrote me right away, but I had not received her
message, but the Almighty had telephoned me most emphatically, and
I obeyed the summons, and found the impression was not a delusion,
but a divine impression. After my dear child had so far recovered as
to be considered out of danger, I returned to my field of labor in
western N. Y. Was it not the Lord that made known to me the serious
sickness at home, and inspired my heart to hasten to the suffering
family? And was it not kind in the blessed Lord, to help in such a
time of need? Truly, God is good, in all His works and ways; and His
loving care is graciously manifested to all the creatures that He
hath made. How much of earth’s storm and tempest we might avoid, if
we would only keep our eyes and our ears open to see and hear what
God would have us see and hear.

During my pastorate at Seneca Falls, N. Y., I not only preached at
Seneca Falls, but at Auburn, Owosco and Niles, N. Y. Every other
week I would preach at Owosco and Niles on the Lord’s day, and on
my way back to Seneca Falls, I would stop at Auburn and preach the
word of life, on Monday evening at sister Osborne’s; and this was
my home when at Auburn. On the occasion of which I now speak, I was
requested to stop, and take tea at another place, where I had never
been before. The family where I was to stop was made up of three
persons, father, daughter, and an aunt of the daughter. Father and
sister-in-law were perhaps fifty years of age. The daughter I should
judge, twenty-five years of age, and a member of the M. E. Church in
that place. I had never met with any of this family prior to this
meeting, except _this_ young lady, and her, only one week before,
and that at a Quarterly meeting. I called at this place according to
agreement to take tea, and spend a couple of hours before service.
It was in mid-winter. I entered the house, the young lady met me
very politely, took my hat and overcoat, and I took a seat. This was
a well-to-do family; they had an abundance of this world’s goods.
The house was large, and well furnished. I had not been in the house
five minutes, before a strange impression came on me, bewildering,
sickening, and with it, came this thought, “unclean devils, unclean
devils.” It seemed to me that I should die, if I did not leave that
house. I called for my hat and coat, and left. This woman followed
me for several weeks, and always when she came near me, the same
impression would come over me, unclean devils. Suffice to say, she
was a bad woman. She had been too intimate with a married man, who
was a class-leader in one of the churches. Was she actuated by the
same spirit that those women were that followed Paul and Silas around
and declared that they were the real servants of God; and is it not
a fact, that the quickest way to destroy the work of God in any
place, is to have doubtful characters, professedly, embrace it? and
herald abroad the praises of the servants of God? And these persons
being so well understood, their lives and their character so well
pronounced as to become a stench in the nostrils of the community,
and a tremendous bar to the progress of Christianity in every
community where such exists. I am always troubled when some people
endorse me, and feel like saying, The Lord have mercy on me now! God
gave me great prosperity on this big charge, a revival prevailed
through the two years. More than one hundred professed conversion at
Seneca Falls, besides many were converted at the other points. At
Seneca Falls, at one time during our stay there, souls were converted
in every means of grace for several months, more than one hundred
professed to be sanctified wholly. Some of the richest displays of
God’s saving power that I ever saw, was at points on this field of
labor. Many that were poor, and wretched slaves to intemperance and
licentiousness, were washed, and made clean during our stay here,
gems were gathered in, that will deck the Saviour’s Crown forever
and ever. More than twenty years have come and gone since we left
that field of suffering, cross-bearing, and victory, and yet we would
not have the time we spent there blotted out of life’s work for any
amount of earth’s riches; and I want to record right here, while this
subject is before us, praise and thanksgiving to my heavenly Father,
for blessing us, and opening our eyes to see danger, and grace to
avoid it, especially in the case referred to at “A”--I have no doubt,
but that the devil in some way, wanted to use that wicked woman to
destroy the work of God on that big charge.

Did not Bramwell have knowledge given to him to see the deception of
the man that professed he wanted help for God’s cause, when Bramwell
was led to see, it was a bastard child, help was sought for?

The church has suffered much in the past by the deception of wicked
men and women which might have been different, had the church been
baptized with the Holy Ghost as it was her privilege to be. Peter
saw at once the fraud practiced by Ananias and Sapphira and justly
rebuked them. And what a blessing it would be to the church and the
world, if the ministry, and laity, had the anointing--the eye salve
of the Holy Ghost. I have been perfectly surprised at the success
that these saintly appearing frauds have had in playing their tricks
upon credulous, godly people. The real saint, the wholly sanctified,
the pure in heart, have the eye salve daily applied; Yea, they
carry with them, a bank note detective; their coin, is weighed and
measured at sight. Perhaps all clearly saved people have not so clear
a conception of character, and are not able to judge so readily, of
their merit, or demerit as others. However that may be, I believe
that all clearly saved people, have remarkable good judgment in
regard to character as well as in other matters.

But to return to the theme before us, Dreams, Presentiments--Dreams
come, when sleep is upon us, Presentiments come upon us in our
wakeful moments; and both may be of the Lord as already shown, though
not always. It is wise, however, to try the spirits, and hold fast
to that which is good. I have had mapped out to me in my dreams, and
I think by the spirit of the Lord, fields of labor that I afterwards
occupied, as clear as a sunbeam; and the peculiar phases of my field
of labor, and the peculiar characters of the new field, as though
written out by the hand of inspiration. I will give but one or two
incidents. Three months prior to my being stationed at Oswego, N. Y.,
I found myself in my dream at Oswego, on my way home from conference,
to look over the situation, and arrange for moving on. I met a few,
very poor saints, discouraged, and ready to give up and die out. I
was told in my dream that I had better look at Brother L. H. R’s.
house, perhaps it would suit me. At this time Brother Robinson was
preacher in charge at Oswego, and what was still more strange about
this dream, this was his first year at Oswego, and some three months
before conference. I was very much concerned about a four gallon jug
that I had full of very rich, sweet milk. I was anxious to have it
kept sweet. A brother pointed out to me a living stream that run near
by, and said that I could put my jug of milk in that stream and it
would keep. Conference sent me to Oswego that fall, and every step
that I took in my dream came literally to pass, looking at the former
preacher’s house, and all, except my jug of milk. I soon discovered
what my milk meant. The saints at that place had been very much
soured up over the conduct of some laborers that they had placed
great confidence in, so that the smut covered them deeply. I found my
big jug of sweet milk just what they needed. The pure unadulterated
gospel, was to them the sincere milk of the word. They received it
gladly and grew thereby. In many of the fields of labor that I have
occupied, I have previously occupied in dreams when sleep was upon
me. A short time before, being stationed at Binghamton, God, by
His holy Spirit when deep sleep was upon me, printed upon memory’s
tablet, that beautiful Parlor City; surrounded by those lovely hills,
covered with green foliage; and those beautiful streams, clear as
crystal, reflecting the sunlight of heaven; reminding one of that
“stream that makes glad the City of our God.” I saw Court street as
clear as day; our church and parsonage; I also saw our society. At
that time they were having a little that was unpleasant, a church
trial. I saw the division of feeling, one party stood a little way
off from the other, shaking their fists at the other party, but as
soon as I approached them, they came together and all was lovely.




                                  X.

                            HEALING FAITH.


Much has been said and written on the subject of healing faith.
God has said much on that subject for our benefit. “The prayer of
faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up.” Many
scriptures might be introduced bearing upon this subject; but the
statement above so clear, and emphatic, will suffice. Genuine faith
is begotten of the spirit. It is not born of simple desire. Here a
great many good people have made great mistakes, they have had great
_desires_ for those that were sick, that they should recover--they
have prayed to this end, and have gone so far as to make statements
very positive that they _knew_ they would recover, because God had
told them so, when the facts were very clear--their supposed faith
was nothing but desire. This has proved true in a great many cases,
the subject of prayer passing into eternity soon after these positive
statements were made. If they had had genuine faith, the sick would
have recovered. In no case, have we ever discovered the Almighty
arrayed against Himself, but in every operation we find it in exact
harmony with a “thus saith the Lord.”

Take the case of President Garfield. The nation prayed for his
recovery. Many said--“He will recover,” but he died. Why did he not
recover? good people prayed for him--and thought--and said that he
would be spared to the nation. To this I answer,--The prayer offered
for him, _was not inspired by the Holy Ghost_; if it had been, God
would have raised him up. The word of the Lord is--“The prayer of
faith shall save the sick.” _Doubtless_, the inspiration of this
class was purely carnal.

The word of the Lord is, “That if two of you shall agree on earth as
touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them
of my Father which is in Heaven.” Now, a great many were united
in praying for the President, and they were good people; but they
put in an if in every prayer; and that if, in every case sums up a
tremendous _doubt_, which reveals as clear as day, the lack of that
faith, begotten of the “Spirit,” which brings health immediately
to its possessor. Faith begotten of the spirit is very positive:
it amounts to a divine assurance--and utters forth its triumphant
voice, “_It shall be done_”--and it is done. This kind, has no
_ifs_ in it. It makes its possessor bold to move on to the aid of
the sick and suffering; and has an intuitive perception, that the
“power of the Lord is present to heal.” Good-will was, doubtless,
the great incentive in the President’s case. The scriptures very
clearly indicate that the power of the Lord is not always present to
heal; likewise experience by those that have been healed by faith,
and have at times had faith that has brought health immediately to
the bodies of others, are not always thus blessed. St. Paul, left
his co-laborer, TROPHIMUS, sick at Miletus, which he would not have
done, had he been in possession of that _faith_, which so wonderfully
characterized his labors on other occasions.

William Bramwell, a man of mighty faith in the power of God to heal,
had prayed for a certain person and God had raised them up in answer
to his prayers on several occasions, but the last time that he was
called upon to pray for this person, he could not, and said they must
die, or that in substance.

I praise God, that I was ever put in possession of that _faith_,
which brought health to my body, when sick, and suffering. When
stationed at Utica, I was taken one Sabbath evening while preaching,
with the dysentery. I was very sick until Friday. I had quite
frequent bloody evacuations, with tenesmus, of a very severe
character. My dear companion was very much alarmed in regard to
my very dangerous symptoms, and thought she had better go for the
doctor. I felt all through me--I want no doctor but Jesus. In that
direction I continued to look. My symptoms became more alarming.
Anxiety on the part of my family increased. Conviction with me,
that Jesus Christ was coming to check disease, and heal my body,
seemed to grow more and more like a living reality. Friday morning
dawned upon us, and to all appearances, I was rapidly yielding in
my physical powers, to the destructive power of the fearful disease
that was preying so rapidly upon my body. After much solicitation on
the part of my very precious wife, I consented to let her go after
the doctor. A moment after she left the house, Jesus came--laid His
hand upon me, and made me every whit whole: Bless His holy name!
The doctor did not come until Saturday. He left me two very small
bottles of pills, and charged me not to go to church on the coming
Sabbath. However, I went to church, preached twice at Utica, rode
twelve miles and preached, making three sermons; and with such a
blessing, it did seem to me that my soul would leave my body if
God should let another drop of love on me. Growing out of this, I
had an experience where I knew what the statement meant, “_For I
am sick of love_.” On another occasion after this, when sick, and
much worn down by overwork, I went to the Murray camp-meeting with
a view of recuperation. I felt peculiarly led of the spirit to go.
On arriving there I was powerfully tempted to leave the ground and
return home. As it was about tea time I was invited to take tea with
an old friend. After tea we had prayers. The Lord blessed me--I felt
better, but did not get the healing power on my body which I so much
needed. I was very much helped all through the meeting. The day the
meeting closed, Brother Roberts was tying up his tent, Sister Roberts
asked me if I had received the help in my body that I needed--I said
no; but while in conversation with her, the blessing came with such
force that disease and weakness oozed out from the very center of
every bone in my body, and instantly I was covered with perspiration;
and for months after this, I felt as though I was made up of iron. I
could preach, visit, sing, pray and study a good share of the hours
out of every twenty-four. On a good many occasions, the blessed Jesus
has wonderfully blessed, and healed, both soul and body. God has at
times, touched my heart, and given to me faith for others, and in
answer to prayer, I have seen them raised up to health. I have not
always had faith for myself, nor for others.

I have been sick, have suffered pain, but could not cause the heavens
to bend, seemingly a single inch towards my deliverance--when at the
same time my soul was blessed and happy in God. I will mention a few
cases where God in answer to prayer healed them almost instantly.

Twenty-five years ago our conference was held at Binghamton, N. Y. A
number of preachers were kept at Sister Sparks. One of them was very
sick, with an intense fever. We sat down to the table for our tea.
The burden came on me for this suffering brother, I could not eat,
and proposed that prayer should be offered for him. In a few moments
the fever was checked, and a copious perspiration followed. The
brother got up, took tea, went to church, exhorted after the sermon
as though he had never been sick in all his life.

At a camp meeting, a sister, one of my members, tenting with the
Rose pilgrims as we had no tent on the ground, was taken sick with
what seemed to be, Asiatic cholera. Her case was so alarming after
a night’s suffering the Rose preacher came to me and said, Brother
Osborne, that sister is so sick that you must have her taken off the
ground as none can stay in the tent except those that wait on her.
Instantly my faith took hold on God for her recovery. I did not know
until that moment that she was sick. I went into the tent where she
was. I saw she was very sick. I said to her, “you know that Jesus
can make you well in a moment.” She answered, “Yes.” I said, “don’t
you think that He wants to make you well now?” She replied, “I think
He will if you ask him.” In less than three minutes she was on her
feet praising God with all her might. She dressed herself, ate her
breakfast, went about her Master’s business and enjoyed the meeting
the rest of the time as though she had been on Pisgah from the
beginning.

Sister Francisco of Rome, was to all appearance, nearly used up
with what a number of the great doctors called cancers. One in her
throat, nearly choked her to death. Another on her upper gums. The
first time that I visited her, I said, “Sister, you know that Jesus
Christ can make you well.” She replied, “Yes, but the doctors all say
that I must die.” She became so bad off--the odor emanating from the
cancer was so offensive, that it was with difficulty that anybody
could be in the house with her. I thought on several occasions as I
went to visit her, this will be, in all probability, the last time
that I shall visit her until I go to preach her funeral sermon.
The last time I called upon her before she was healed, she said to
me, “Brother Osborne, the Lord Jesus is going to make me well.” I
replied--“Praise the Lord, it is just like him to do so.” Two days
after this the Lord touched her; the cancer left her throat--dropped
off her gum--and she ran about that part of the city and reported
what great things the Lord had done for her. Immediately she went at
hard work, and now, more than three years have passed away, and she
is still strong and healthy.

Another case at Rome, Sister Conrad had been very sick for about two
months, with fever and other difficulties. Her right lung had lost
its power of action; her left arm had become paralyzed. The neighbors
thought she could not live but a short time; the doctors considered
her case hopeless. Wife and I thought that we ought to visit her
that _Wednesday_. On that day she looked more like a corpse, than a
living being. We sang, and prayed--The Lord was present to heal. Such
a display of God’s power to heal I never saw before. First she was
made clear in the blessing of perfect love. This was glorious. After
this, came a mighty wave of liquid love and fire--and health. When it
touched the withered lung, how she did shout forth the praises of our
God. This aroused the people in that region who came around to see
what the matter was. Then the power struck the palsied arm, and that
began to move about to the tune of “Glory Hallelujah,” and this she
continued for more than two hours. She got up, dressed herself, went
to supper, ate a hearty meal, and slept the soundest, the sweetest,
that night, that she had done for a long while before. She rose early
the next morning, mended her husband’s pants, ate her breakfast, and
moved about as well as ever.

I must mention one more occasion when the good Lord wrought seemingly
a miracle on my body, when very sick. I had just finished my fourth
camp-meeting. At the last one I had taken the worst cold I think
that I ever had. A severe rain the first night of the meeting had
moistened all the bedding in the tent where I made it my home. The
bed that I occupied, was wet from head to foot; I suppose that was
the secret of my cold; it covered me from head to foot--and all
through my being. The next morning after my arrival at home, and
during the morning’s hour of prayer and worship, the Lord touched
the heart of my wife for me, and showers of blessings came down on
my soul and body--and such an operation! My cold broke up like the
breaking up of a river after a severe winter. It oozed out from every
pore. If I had been put through one of _Dr. Strong’s_ Turkish baths,
the operation could not have been any more marvelous.

The promises of God are for the comfort, and special benefit of the
saints. The theory already advanced of faith healing, we believe is
the doctrine of the Bible. We might introduce many more important
experiences bearing upon the correct theory of faith healing, but
what we have already said, may be sufficient.

There are other theories of faith healing, that contain some truth,
and much error. For instance, the theory that in the atonement,
a perfect state of health was secured for the body, the same
as perfection for the soul. Some scriptures are introduced to
substantiate this theory.

The following are some of them. “_The prayer of faith shall save
the sick_;” and, “_Who, healeth all thy diseases_;” “_Ask and ye
shall receive_;” and many others are quoted to prove their doctrine.
I cannot see that they prove the theory. The experience of the
saints in all ages prove the contrary. Job was a representative
saint. God endorsed him as being correct according to His standard
of righteousness. I maintain that _sickness_, is a part of God’s
plan for disciplinary purposes, just as much as changing seasons
are necessary for the growth and development of vegetation. Suppose
that perpetual sunshine was to cover the earth; it would soon become
sterile, barren and desolate. For the well-being of the human family,
and the production of earth’s blessings to sustain the same, the
changing seasons, sunshine and cloud, stormy wind fulfilling His
word, are all necessary. We are so made up, that a great strain of
prosperity, very much endangers our remaining meek, and humble, like
our divine Lord and Master. Perhaps one scripture will be sufficient
to prove this theory. “_Whom the Lord loveth, He chasteneth, and
scourgeth every son whom He receiveth._” Sickness, is a tremendous
scourge, and some people have a great deal more of that kind of
discipline than they would have, if they were more studious, and
tried to learn the lesson God designed.

_The mind cure_, falsely so called, is perhaps, the most subtile
humbug of the day. While it contains some truth in small homeopathic
doses, its heavy coating is profound deception. Its assumptions in
the main, are false. Without going into a thorough analysis of this
science, falsely so called, we proceed to notice what little truth it
contains. It is a well-known fact to the learned, that the _mind_,
has a marvelous power over all of our physical nature. Many have been
made sick, by simple imagination. In times of pestilence, doubtless,
one of the greatest means of spreading the disease, has been, the
imagination. History tells us that men condemned to death have been
given over to physicians in order to test the power of the mind over
matter; and in many cases death was the result, where the patient
was not harmed in any way, but simply made to believe that a vein
had been opened in their arm, and that they were slowly, but surely
bleeding to death.

Thirty years since, I was living in western N. Y. In the place
Spiritualism was running high. A canal boat stopped, a man on board
they thought had the cholera, they sent for a doctor. A spirit-medium
near by heard the request, and without being asked, stepped aboard
the boat, and went into the cabin where lay the sick man. The medium
commenced about this kind of talk, “What are you laying here for
you lazy fellow? get up, and go out on deck, or you will die sure,”
assuring him there was nothing the matter of him. He continued this
kind of talk--would pull and haul the fellow, and finally succeeded
in getting him on deck; and in a little while, he was declared
well--and the boat moved on. The next morning, a neighbor of mine,
strong in the faith of this humbug philosophy, came into my house
just as we had finished our morning meal. The following dialogue
ensued. “Now, Mr. Osborne, what have you got to say when spirits
come right into this place and cure a man, sick, nigh unto death
with the cholera?” I replied, “it was simply the power of mind over
matter; and I can illustrate my meaning, and all there was of _that_.
Here is my little boy, seven years old, perfectly healthy, he has
just finished a hearty meal. Now, by the same process, I can make
him vomit up his hearty breakfast.” I commenced by telling him that
he was sick! I repeated it. I made sickening faces, groaned and
said, “Lester, you are sick!” Inside of three minutes, he vomited
as heartily as though he had taken an emetic. This was accomplished
without the aid of departed spirits.

The Wesleys were quick to discover the good there was in the
surroundings of life, and utilize it for the Glory of God. The wicked
in their Bacchanalian sports, used some grand tunes, for their songs
of mirth. Charles Wesley said, “Music alas! too long has been pressed
to obey the devil;” and many of these tunes he rescued from their
perilous associations, clothed them in the garb of saintly purity,
and sent them forth to bless the saints of all ages; and thus, men
and women have learned something of the God given law that mind has
over matter, and have connected to this power, the illegitimate
monstrosity, born of delusion, and speculations, and named it
“CHRISTIAN SCIENCE, or MIND CURE.”

Now, about how far, and in what way may we be benefited by this
knowledge?

1--It is a well-known fact, that good nature, hopefulness, and
cheerfulness, are great preventives to sickness. I believe that many
are made sick by simple anticipation; and to disabuse their minds of
such an idea, often works wonders.

2--Business men often use this power to create a panic in the “Stock
market.” On Wall street, N. Y., they have their Bulls and Bears. One
class are ready to buy, the other to sell. One cry up stock, the
other cry down stock, as the case may be. This procedure affects the
market all over the country. Speculators understand this much of the
“_Science_.” It has been truthfully said, “That the children of this
world in their generation, are wiser than the children of light.” Oh,
that we might be as wise, and press good out of all the events of
life.

3--We should on all occasions, cry up stock! health for soul and
body, and prosperity for Zion--Amen.

I have heard it said that one scurvy sheep, would affect the whole
flock. A minister, class leader, steward, or any prominent member of
a society, will, if always complaining, murmuring, fault-finding,
breed death and desolation, where ever they go. Such characters,
should never be allowed to enter a sick room. That class carry gloom
and discouragement in their very appearance; and instead of being a
comfort and help, they produce in many cases, a dangerous relapse.
Preachers, sometimes, linger about the sore spots, until all, seem
to be putrification. Instead of looking at the fountain of life, its
immensity, enough for each, enough for all, enough forevermore, and
receiving its fullness in themselves, always ready to help others,
come short by the former process.

Don’t say much about your troubles; cry up stock to the best of your
ability, and as God, and your conscience will allow, but don’t report
for the devil.

There is great force in always looking on the bright side of every
question. But this, you cannot, nor will not do, unless you live on
the sunny side of the Rock. It is right, and proper, to turn the
attention of the sorrowing ones of earth to the bright side--yea, to
the sun bright clime of Paradise, where the shadows of sorrow will
never strike across our pathway; where the inhabitants will never say
“_I am sick_!”

Here, is where the real saint lives, under the wing of the Almighty,
“where God the Son forever reigns, and scatters night away.”

This is not all in eternity, but on this side of the boundary line of
time, we have the sunshine of heaven, and breezes from the land where
flowers forever bloom.

Abstractly considered, aside from the influence the Holy Spirit has
upon the Christian character and life, the mind has a marvelous
power over our entire being; and this, has been prostituted, for
worldly purposes. Here, is where the great wrong comes in. The term,
“Christian science, or mind cure,” is misleading. It does not claim
to depend upon the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ, for any of its
accomplishments; but upon the knowledge they have of the power, the
_mind_ has over matter. To be a Christian science, it must draw
its inspiration from Christ Jesus the Lord. Some of its advocates,
openly, and unblushingly deny the divinity of _Him_, and the glory of
whatever is accomplished by this power, they give to humanity, and
the force of nature, and some to departed spirits, and not to Jesus
Christ.

As an example of Christian Science superstition exceeding anything
attempted by the most ignorant advocates of patient Faith Healing,
read the following, taken verbatim from a text-book on Mind Cure,
issued by the president of the “New York School of Primitive and
Practical Christian Science,” who states that _his_ school will be
free from “eccentricity, pretension, and fanaticism!”


                      “PRAYER FOR A DYSPEPTIC.”

“Holy Reality! We believe in Thee that thou art EVERYWHERE present.
We really believe it. Blessed Reality we do not pretend to believe,
think we believe, believe that we believe. We believe. Believing
that thou art everywhere present, we believe that Thou art in this
patient’s stomach, in every fibre, in every cell, in every atom,
that Thou art the soul, only Reality of that stomach. Heavenly, Holy
Reality, we will try not be such hypocrites and infidels, as every
day of our lives to affirm our faith in Thee and then immediately
begin to tell how sick we are, forgetting that Thou art everything
and that Thou art not sick, and therefore that nothing in this
universe was ever sick, is now sick, or can be sick. Forgive us our
sins in that we have this day talked about our backaches, that we
have told our neighbors that our food hurts us, that we mentioned to
a visitor that there was a lump in our stomach, that we have wasted
our valuable time which should have been spent in thy service, in
worrying for fear that our stomach would grow worse, in that we
disobeyed Thy blessed law, in thinking that some kind of medicine
would help us. We know, Father and Mother of us all, that there is no
such a thing as a really diseased stomach, that the disease is the
CARNAL MORTAL MIND given over to the WORLD, the Flesh, and the Devil;
that the mortal mind is a twist, a distortion, a false attitude, the
HARMATIA of Thought, Shining and Glorious Verity, we recognize the
great and splendid FACT that the moment we really believe the truth,
disease ceases to trouble us, that the truth is, there is no disease
in either real body or mind; that in the mind there seems to be a
disease is a false belief, a parasite, a hateful excrescence, and
that what happens in the body is the shadow of the LIE in the SOUL.
Lord, help us to believe that ALL EVIL is utterly unreal; that it is
silly to be sick, absurd to be ailing, wicked to be wailing, atheism
and denial of God to say ‘I am sick.’ Help us to stoutly affirm with
our hand in Your hand, with our eyes fixed on Thee that we have no
dyspepsia, that we will never have dyspepsia, that there is no such
thing, that there never was any such thing, that there never will be
any such thing Amen.”--_Hazzard._

Mrs. Eddy of Chicago, and others, have written much on “Christian
Science.” In some of her writings she disclaims affinity with
Spiritualism; but according to my knowledge of the matter, it was
evolved from that source. Some thirty-five years since, I sat with
them in a seance, where a lady, almost gone with consumption was
operated upon by the same treatment that the “Christian scientists”
practice to-day. From a helpless, speechless condition she revived
so that she was able to dress herself and walk about the yard. She
continued to improve for about three months, then suddenly relapsed,
and died.

Where disease has been located simply in the mind, which is often
the case, some marvelous cures have been effected by this class of
doctors; and because they found a supposed mental cause adequate to a
cure in a few cases, leaped to a wild conclusion that all causes were
mental, and would yield to the same treatment. They claim that our
bodies are sensationless; they do not suffer, they have no pain, that
all suffering is in the mind; then to work up a belief, that we do
not suffer, and some are really made to believe that doctrine.

Whatever pretensions the teachers of this “Science,” present to
the public, as a curative power; and however much they may claim
sympathy for the sick and suffering, the real gist of the matter
seems to be, they are after cash. They charge enormously for teaching
the “Science,” and the same for helping the sick; as I have been
informed, they do not teach, or give aid to the sick, without pay
in advance. How unlike Jesus, is all such operations, who, went
everywhere doing good, without money, and without price. Whoever
heard, of a real child of God, asking pay, for going to pray to God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, for a sick brother, or sister, or the
wickedest person on earth? We come to this conclusion, that, their
foundation is on the sand; and not on the merits of the precious
_blood_ of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.




                                 XI.

                            A DOUBLE CURE.


Hark! a light step--followed by a heavy tread--is approaching my
study. What does it mean? It is a cold, freezing day in February, and
it is Saturday--a very busy day for me. Well, I should think wife
would entertain company in the parlor. But here she comes, followed
by a person right from the State lunatic asylum--one that I had met
with before. I must confess that I felt a little strange with such
company; but I immediately arose and gave the brother my hand, and
said--“Good morning, Mr. Van Benschoten; how do you do?” “I am well,
bless God! I called, Brother Osborne, to tell you what great things
the Lord has done for me.” He then gave me his experience, which is
as follows:

I have been in the New York Asylum for two years, and have been
growing worse, so that for several months I have not been outside
these prison walls. Recently, Mr. Gray, the superintendent, wrote my
wife that I was an incurable case. Of course, I expected to remain
incarcerated within those prison walls; but what was still worse, I
expected my reason to remain dethroned; which in the past had been
periodically. But I was growing worse; my body was quite emaciated: I
had lost my appetite, and in fact, I was full of fearful forebodings,
a wretched man. My case was a sad one. Here I must suffer out this
brief existence, in misery--pain--sorrow--shame and remorse--and then
an eternity with devils and damned spirits; and all this brought
on by my own licentiousness. “O wretched man that I am! who shall
deliver me from the body of this death?” A companion in tribulation
said to me, the Lord can heal you, soul and body, and gave me this
passage of Scripture: “And the prayer of faith shall save the sick,
and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he has committed sins, they
shall be forgiven him.” I thought, that just covers my case--but
_how_, to make it available? I was told by my comrade in distress,
that I must fast and pray; which I did, until I wore my knees sore.
I was then watched very narrowly, and prohibited from getting upon
my knees; and finally, I was shut up at night in a crib, in order to
prevent, as I suppose the doctors viewed it, a further development of
my new phase of insanity. The crib is something like a large cradle,
without rocker,--with a cover of slats that shut over the top, and is
locked down when occupied by any one. While in this condition, I was
led to think of God’s goodness to me in sparing my life so long, and
I a rebel against him.

I thought of the effort I had been making to get to Him; my sins
had appeared in dreadful array, which I loathed with all my heart.
I felt that there was real godly sorrow in me. I had besought the
Lord to pardon my sins, and heal my body. I believed that he was able
to do it; yea, I thought that he was willing to do it; I thought
of the promise,--“The prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the
Lord shall raise him up; and if he has committed sins, they shall be
forgiven him.” I said O Lord, why not now! they have locked me up to
prevent my getting upon my knees; but can’t the Lord bless me lying
on my back? Can’t the Almighty come right through these slats?

I heard a voice saying, yes! He can. The next moment I was believing
in God with all my heart. Something said, why not believe that God
will do his work, and _do it now_! I said Lord, thou _wilt_ do it
now! Just then I felt a very strange sensation going all through my
body; and with it a conviction that the work was done. I felt glory
to God! all through my soul and body. It flowed from my heart, like
oil from a flowing well; and continued to bubble up just as Jesus
promised it should do. “The water that I give you, shall be in you a
well of water, springing up unto everlasting life.” Praise our God
forever! The next morning, soon after coming out of the crib, I met
the head physician. He said good morning Van; how are you? I am well,
I replied,--glory to God! Van, what do you mean? I mean that the good
Lord came right down into the crib last night and healed my soul and
body--glory to God! glory! glory! glory! forever and ever! amen!
amen! The doctor looked wild, and said: Van be careful, or we shall
put you up in No. “11.” (The hall where the incurable cases were
kept.) The brother constantly affirmed that God had made him whole,
every whit. Within four weeks from the time the superintendent wrote
this brother’s wife that her husband was incurable, he wrote her that
he was so much better that she could come after him; but did not
state how he was cured.

Three years after, I met this Brother on the cars. His first
utterances were, as I approached him, Glory to God! Brother Osborne,
the Lord saves me soul and body. He said that he had not had a
symptom of his old disease since his last night in the crib. Our God
is mighty to save!




                                 XII.

                            JUSTIFICATION.


Justification implies pardon for our sins, past and
present--something that God does for us; and regeneration is
something done within us. Justification is generally understood to
embrace both pardon and regeneration. They are, however, so near
together as to belong to the same family; in fact, they are twins,
and, taken together, they imply--first, reconciliation to God. In
our natural condition, we are enemies to Him--made so by the sin of
our first parents; secondly, by our own wicked works. “Because the
carnal mind is enmity against God; for it is not subject to the law
of God, neither indeed can be. So, then, they that are in the flesh
cannot please God.” Jesus says, “Without me, ye can do nothing;”
so that in our natural, unsaved condition we cannot do the will of
God. Reconciliation implies Godly sorrow for sin, and a confession
of the same, and obedience to the divine law. “Who so confesseth and
forsaketh them, shall have mercy.” Again, it implies making wrongs
right. If we have taken in deal, or in any other way, that which
did not belong to us, we shall promptly restore. If we have wronged
another in his character, we shall hasten to make it right. “Whoso
keepeth the whole law, and yet offendeth in one point, is guilty of
all.”

Many are in the dark in regard to their Justification; but there is
no necessity for that, for where this work is wrought in the heart
there are evidences that are unmistakable. For, says the Apostle,
“Ye have not received the Spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye
have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, ‘Abba, Father.’
The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit that we are the
children of God.” Here are two unimpeachable witnesses to the fact of
a man’s conversion to God. First, the Spirit of God witnesses to the
fact; that is, God the Holy Ghost divinely impresses the soul that
the work is wrought--an inward conviction that our sins are forgiven;
that so far as the east is from the west, so far hath he removed our
transgressions from us.

Again, our spirit or our mind is turned inward, and being illuminated
by the Holy Ghost can discern or perceive the great change wrought
within; and the witnesses uniting declare the great transaction
done, and the soul cries out instinctively, “I am my Lord’s, and he
is mine.” Glory to God! Amen. Again the fact that the kingdom is
fixed within, bringing forth its legitimate fruit--righteousness,
and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost--is positive assurance that
reconciliation to God has been consummated. “That being translated
from the kingdom of darkness to the kingdom of God’s dear Son,” the
soul is exquisitely happy, and in joyous exclamation sings, “Tongue
cannot express the sweet comfort and peace of a soul in its earliest
love;” and so long as the soul retains pardon, it can sing, “Jesus
all the day long is my joy and my song, O, that all his salvation
might see.”

Again reconciliation to God implies that we have renounced the devil
and all his works, the vain pomp and glory of the world, with all
covetous desires of the same, and the carnal desires of the flesh, so
that we will not follow or be led by them. Here, is coming out from
the world. The eye has become single to the glory of God, and the
whole body is full of light. A justified soul has the light in regard
to all the demands the Almighty has upon them and a determination to
walk in it; hence, everything that is designed to please the lust
of the eye, the lust of the flesh, the pride of life, will be laid
aside. We shall eat, drink, labor and dress for the glory of God,
and, if in any of these practices, whether it be eating or drinking,
chewing, snuffing, or smoking tobacco, there remains a doubt in
regard to the right or wrong of the matter, we are under condemnation
if we practice the same, and this extends to all the relations of
life. “He that doubteth is damned if he eat, because he eateth not of
faith, for whatsoever is not of faith is sin.”

A justified soul has light in regard to costly churches, and the
modern mode of selling them to the highest bidder, and running them
according to modern expediency. It will not engage in such work,
neither will it endorse by its means or its presence, the worship
of God, singing, praying, or preaching, by unhallowed lips. It will
not join hand in hand with the secret oath bound fraternity, that
in heart, and in life, are opposed to the Gospel of Christ, full of
worldly speculation, pride, fashion, banqueting, revelry, mirth,
trifling, worldly mindedness, having the form of godliness, but
denying the power thereof, from such, the command is to turn away,
and the soul that is freely justified before God responds, “Lord
obediently I’ll go.” Yes, Glory to God, it is in their hearts to turn
from every abomination.

O, glory! Justification is a wonderful blessing! With this, we are
enabled to keep all of God’s commands. It is not true, as commonly
reported in religious meetings, by those professing salvation, that
they are in the way, and yet, they are making zig-zag paths. “Strait
is the gate and narrow is the way that leadeth unto life,” and the
justified soul has found it, and is walking in it. Hallelujah! The
first introduction into the kingdom of grace, gives the victory
over the world, the flesh, and the devil, and not only so, they
are happy in God. “Believing,” says James, “ye rejoice with joy
that is unspeakable and full of glory.” “Again, the redeemed of the
Lord shall return and come to Zion, with songs and everlasting joy
upon their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow
and sighing shall flee away.” Glory to God for justifying grace.
This takes murmuring, complaining, fault-finding, dishonesty,
covetousness, hatred, ill-will, emulation, strife, wrath, jealousy,
adultery, and every miserable thing, blue devils, and all out of a
man.

Dear reader, do you enjoy this grace?


                          HOLINESS DEFINED.

We read this paper before the ministerial association of Oswego,
N. Y., January, 1880. We give the paper, and some of its criticisms:

They gave me this scripture to write from. “_And the very God of
peace sanctify you wholly._”--1 Thess. 5:23.

We formulated it in this way. What more did the prayer embrace than
what they already had?

They were a Christian people. This they manifested. First, by their
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. Secondly, by their love for God and
each other. And thirdly, by their keeping the commandments, and
entertaining a blessed hope of a glorious resurrection.

In this epistle, the first I think that the apostle wrote to any
church, he does not reprove them for any faults, or failures in their
moral or religious character, which he was always sure to do, if the
condition of things required it; but treated them as a pure church;
manifesting at the same time, a strong desire that they should attain
unto all that completeness of life and character, which God required
at their hands; and that holiness, which will alone permit us to see
his face in peace. “_And holiness, without which, no man shall see
the Lord._”--Heb. 12:14.

Do the scriptures teach a distinction between regeneration, and
entire sanctification? They do. “And I brethren, could not speak
unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes
in Christ. For ye are yet carnal; for whereas there is among you
envying, and strife, and divisions are ye not carnal, and walk as
men?”

“Having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse
ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God.” In that wonderful prayer of the
Saviour, “Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is truth,” the
same doctrine is clearly brought to light.

The scriptures do assume a distinction between regeneration, and
entire sanctification, or being sanctified wholly.

To sinners, God says--“Ye must be born again.” To the regenerate, He
says, “be ye holy, for I am holy.” Unanswerable argument. These two
classes of commands, in their various forms, are prominent through
the gospels, and epistles. Different terms are employed in the
scriptures to represent the same state, a perfect salvation.

Perfect love, perfection, sanctification, and holiness, are
synonymous terms, pointing to the same exalted state of saving
grace, enjoyed in this life. But while they all denote the same
religious state, each one of them indicate some of its essential
characteristics, and peculiar phases. These terms are significantly
expressive of the _state_.

The term, “_sanctification_,” has regard especially to the work of
a complete consecration of soul and body to God. To “_sanctify_,”
means to set apart; to devote to holy uses. “_Sanctify_ yourselves
therefore, and be ye holy.”

The term “_perfection_,” refers especially to the completeness of
Christian character; its freedom from all sin, and its possession of
all the graces of the spirit; completeness in kind. “Let us go on
unto perfection.”

The term perfect love points more directly to the spirit, temper, and
element in which the wholly _sanctified_ and perfect Christian lives.
“God is love,” and they that dwell in God, dwell in love.

In regeneration sin does not reign; in “_sanctification_,” it does
not exist. In _regeneration_, sin is suspended; in _sanctification_,
it is destroyed. In regeneration, irregular desires, anger, pride,
unbelief, envy, malice, are subdued; in “_sanctification_,” they are
removed.

Regeneration is salvation from the voluntary commission of sin;
“_sanctification_” is salvation from the being of sin. “It is the
will of God, even your _sanctification_.”

This state of grace is both _permissive_, and _authoritative_. The
cleansing stream is in reach of every believer, and the declaration
has gone out, “Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.
It is gloriously possible to touch the hem of his garment, and be
made whole every whit.” But secondly, it is the will of God in an
_authoritative_ sense. He requires us, to seek entire holiness. The
length and breadth of the evangelical law, is this: “Thou shalt love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, with all thy
mind, and with all thy strength, and what is this but a state of
entire sanctification,” and what less could God require? I believe
that all real Christians accept this statement, but disagree in
regard to the time when this blessed work shall be accomplished. Many
putting it at, or near death, while we, upon the authority of God’s
word say that _now_, is the acceptable time, “To day, is the day of
salvation.” This state of grace, bears its own legitimate fruit;
and when Christians love the Lord with all their hearts, love the
souls of men more than their own ease, or emolument, “and love each
other with pure hearts fervently,” their example speaks volumes,
and preaches more effectively than words in favor of the cause they
profess to love.

“Then they put to silence the ignorance of foolish men.” Then the
gospel acquires an influence which wins its way to the heart of
the multitude. The sacramental host of God’s elect, clad with the
panoply of God, saved from the corruptions which are in the world,
and armed with holy faith and mighty prayer, hold in check the
powers of hell, and triumphs over the most formidable, and appalling
obstacles. In her infancy, when few in number, the church by her
purity, silenced the objections of philosophers, and the power of
persecution; successfully assailed the strongholds of superstition,
and finally demolished the whole fabric of idolatry, which had been
rendered venerable and sacred by the lapse of ages. She “quenched the
violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness was
made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the armies of
the aliens.” The simple preaching of the cross, by men “_sanctified_”
_wholly_, baptized with the Holy Ghost and with fire, backed up by a
holy and self denying life, like an earthquake struck dumb a giddy
and clamorous world, and carried terror to the very gates of hell!

Who can look back to the period when Christianity achieved her
noblest triumphs, and see altars and temples crumbling to dust, and
the Gods of the heathen given to the moles and the bats, the church
multiplied and increased under the bloodiest persecutions, martyrs
going to the stake in ecstacy, and their very executioners converted
by the grandeur of their example, and in their turn following them
to the possession of the martyr’s crown--who I say, can survey these
scenes without feeling convinced that there is a power altogether
unearthly in a life of purity and self-denial. A life, wholly
consecrated, and completely “_sanctified_,” heart and tongue set on
fire with God’s eternal love.

When the purity and simplicity of the apostolic age shall
characterize the great mass of Christian believers--when the
institutions of Christianity shall be strictly conformed to the
original plan, and the members of the church shall stand forth
completely armed with the “armour of righteousness on the right
hand and on the left,” then will the kingdom and dominion, and the
greatness of the Kingdom under the whole heaven be given to the
people of the Most High whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and
all dominions shall serve and obey Him. Daniel 7:27.

If these be facts and who can say they are not? then, what is the
duty of every believer? and especially every minister of the gospel,
but to seek until he, or she obtains the blessing?

After the paper was read the chairman called on the clergy to go tell
what they thought of the paper. Brother “B.” was first called on. He
was a Congregationalist. Said Brother B., “I was brought up on that
_cream_, but I don’t believe a word of it now.”

Doubtless this Brother had been converted. His father was a United
Brethren preacher, and believed in the life and power of salvation.
This Brother had said to me previous to this that he and his father
used to hold meetings with just such results and manifestations as
you Free Methodist have. He was looked upon by the association as a
_free thinker_.

Doctor D. T. was next called on. “Well,” said the aged divine, “I sin
every day in thought, word and deed. That is all I have to say about
that paper.”

A Congregationalist missionary to the churches of America, was
present, having preached in the city the Sabbath previous.

When called upon to state his views upon the paper, remarked, “I take
no stock in the doctrine discussed by the paper. If it means to feel
good, there may be something in it and it’s possible I have got it,
for there are times when I feel pretty good.”

Several preachers present would not venture a remark on the subject.
The only one that endorsed the paper was Rev. Frank Beck, an M.
E. preacher. He endorsed it heartily, backing up his argument by
Scripture, Wesley and others; at the same time he was in bondage to
oath-bound societies, and lacked that freedom and unction which every
minister of the gospel ought to possess--might possess, if all was on
the altar, accepted of God, set on fire of the Holy Ghost.

I was surprised with that intelligent, cultured, company of
ministers, who manifested such ignorance in regard to what was meant,
in being a gospel minister, or a real child of God.

Brother H. H. S., a Presbyterian, when asked what he had to say,
replied, “I never met with any of those changes; and am satisfied
with this--I have always been good. I think that I was converted
before I was born, never since.”




                                XIII.

                           A DIRECT ROUTE.


Many have a desire to see Jesus, but miss the route, and fail in the
end. They say a great deal, and do much--but after all they fail.
We read of one away back in the days when Christ was on earth, who
desired to see him, and hearing that he was to pass that way hastened
to the road where he was to pass, _and climbed up a tree_, in order
as he supposed to have a fine prospect; but Jesus called him down.
It is just so with many at the present day; they want to see Jesus,
but take the wrong route! they climb up,--_i. e._, they tell you how
good they are; how much good they have done here and there. I heard a
young preacher say, he went to Baltimore and converted two souls. His
talk was full of self. Jesus was not the one altogether lovely with
him.

It’s down at the foot of the cross, where flows the blood, that
bought our guilty souls for God. This brother like a great many, fail
to touch the blood, consequently, they always dine on old manna.

The last I saw of him he was loaded down with old musty bread, gotten
from the Gibeonites. Too many take this route and fail. The direct
route to Jesus, starts from low down in the valley,--the place called
_self-abasement_. It is true, that way down here, there seems to be
clouds and vapor, mixed with mist, while the eye is turned inward,
and especially while under the direct rays of the Holy Ghost we see
our unlikeness to God,--our infirmities--our ignorance--our sins--our
short comings, heart wanderings, and alienations from him; and as
we confess these to God and our brethren, we grow less in our own
estimation. And as we go down in this way--confessing to the very
bottom, suddenly, and as by magic, the clouds disperse, shadows
fly--the invisible appears to mortal eye--glory to God!

Would you see Jesus? come down into the valley of blessing so sweet!
“He that humbleth himself shall be exalted.” “If we seek to save our
lives we shall lose them.” God has opened up a new and living way;
that is the route of repentance--and confession--and faith in our
Lord Jesus Christ. “If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just
to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.”
We need not be deceived in regard to our whereabouts. This route is
paved all the way through with blood divine.

Then, too, the cross that _kills_ is here; and this is always
visible; and upon its beams are written: “He that would be my
disciple, let him take up his cross daily, and come after me.” The
direct route to Jesus is covered completely by the _cross_! Would you
find it? Come down from your high perch! get off from your stilts,
limber up; be child-like; leave off your affectation; talk natural,
be just what you are; let God have you--and as quick as light from
the smitten steel, you will find yourself in the direct route to
glory; high above the storm and vapor--winging your way to the land
that hath no storms.




                                 XIV.

                        REST, BUT NOT LOITER.


There is a bridge crossing the river Thames, at London, and at one
end of this bridge, there is a seat prepared for the weary pilgrim
to rest himself; and just above this seat hangs a sign, with these
words, “_Rest, but not loiter_.”

In the great plan of salvation, God has provided a mercy-seat,
where all may find _rest_; rest to the weary soul; rest from the
commission of sin, rest from the inbeing of sin, rest from all moral
defilement;--rest from slavish fear, rest from the fear of evil
tidings, rest from the fear of man; rest from the fear of what the
people will say; rest from the fear of want; rest in prosperity,
when all goes well, and in adversity when all goes ill, rest in the
fire, rest out of the fire; rest in sickness, rest in persecution, in
necessities, in cruel mockings, in stripes, in imprisonments; rest
under all the ills which flesh is heir to; and, O! what a blessed
prospect of _rest_ in death--in the resurrection morn; rest, rest
forever in the paradise of God.

How _few_ have found this rest. The multitude are loitering about
Christ, as in bygone days, for the loaves and fishes. You find them
thronging holy places, and in fact, their names are on the church
record--they call themselves Christians,--but, O! how destitute
of _soul-rest_. They talk of rest, but how easily is their rest
turned into unrest, their humility into vain pomp and show; their
love into downright anger; their benevolence, into God-dishonoring
covetousness; their separation from the world into commingling with
those that hate God and trample his law under their feet. The lust of
the eye, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of life, sits enthroned
in their hearts. Many thronged the Saviour when he was on earth,
but how few got near enough to touch the hem of his garment. On one
occasion, a poor woman pressed her way into the crowd, touched the
Saviour and found rest; yes, glory be to God, she found rest for soul
and body. Hallelujah! We may rest, and not loiter.

“Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest.” Thank God! there is a place of rest. You need not
be fretful, peevish, impatient, cross, proud, vain, fierce, heady,
high-minded, jealous, full of deceit--evil speaking--tale-bearing,
covetous, filthy, fearful, unbelieving. No! there is power in Jesus’
blood to wash these all away, and give perfect _rest_ to the soul.
“For we which have believed do enter into rest.”

How refreshing to the weary pilgrim, after the toils of the day are
o’er, the sun sinking in the west, the shades of night coming on,
to have a place of rest,--a place where the cares of life are for
the time-being forgotten, and the mind is at liberty to roam the
vast fields of thought, and revel in all the delights of fancy. How
blessed it will be, after the toils and conflicts of life are o’er,
to have an eternity of rest--to be forever shut in with God, “Where
the wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at rest.”

Rest, but not loiter.




                                 XV.

                         A LIVING SACRIFICE.


God requires a living, not a dead sacrifice. The time for sacrificial
offerings is past. Jesus Christ suffered unto death, even the death
of the cross, to redeem us from all iniquity, and to purify unto
Himself a “peculiar people,” and make us meet for the inheritance of
the saints in light. God now requires, that we should be a complete
offering to Him; soul, body and spirit: all we have, all we are, and
all we ever expect to be, for time and eternity. We frequently say
with our lips, but do we say it deep down in our heart:

                  “Take my soul and body’s powers;
                   Take my mem’ry, mind and will;
                   All my goods, and all my hours;
                   All I know, and all I feel;
                   All I think, or speak, or do;
                   Take my heart, but make it new.”

This is just what God requires; hear the command: “I beseech you
therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your
bodies A LIVING SACRIFICE! holy, acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable service. And be not conformed to this world: but be ye
transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is
this good and acceptable and perfect will of God.” (Ro. 12:12.)

Again, “Ye are not your own! For ye are bought with a price:
therefore glorify God in your body, and spirit, which are his.”
(1 Cor. 6:19.) The above expresses in general, what is implied in
being, “A living sacrifice.” Too many, are content with a sort of
wholesale consecration; and too many we have reason to fear, keep
back a part of the price. Let us, dear reader, look carefully at our
offering, to see, if it be just what God requires, without blemish or
spot, or any such thing.

First, Our memory: Is it devoted to God? Do we always, and under
all circumstances, recollect God’s commandments? Do we always
inquire of Him, before engaging in any business transaction? Do we
remember daily, to discharge our obligations, to God, our brethren
and sisters, our neighbors, and all we have to do with? Do we always
act out our religion, just what we profess before the enemies of the
cross of Christ, as well, as when among His friends?

Second, The mind: We must serve God with our intellects. The mind
must be cultivated for His Glory. We have no right to remain in
ignorance. The command is, “Study to show thyself approved unto God.”
“Thou shalt love the Lord thy God, with all thy soul and with all thy
mind.” Our intellects must be cultivated; not to gain the applause
of men, but that we may have more power to win souls to Christ, and
build them up in that Holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord; and not prostituted, to a time-saving policy.

Third, Our will: The will, to our intellectual machinery, is the
same as the rudder to a vessel. This gives direction to the ship
when under way, and if in the hands of a skilled helmsman, she goes
just as desired. It is so with the will, if in the hands of the Holy
Ghost, our minds will be guided into all truth.

Fourth, The eye: must be wholly sanctified to God, or else we shall
be running after strange flesh, and strange sights. If the eye be
single, thy whole body shall be full of light.

Fifth, The ear: When fully consecrated will be quick to hear when God
speaks, by His providence, His spirit or in His blessed word; but
will not listen to reports of slander, not unsanctified music when
offered up as worship to the great I am.

Sixth, The face: The index of the soul must be clean and comely.
It affords great comfort and delight to look upon, especially when
Jesus Christ is living and reigning in the heart; when the oil of
gladness makes the face to shine; but how it detracts in beauty and
expression, if the mouth be covered over with moustache, like worldly
minded men. To me it is an expression of pride and vanity, as much as
for females to cover their head with flowers and ribbons.

Seventh, The mouth: We must not allow anything to enter our mouths
that would in any way defile our bodies knowingly. That class of food
that proves injurious to the system we must not use; neither drink
what hurts. Tobacco, used in any form, defiles; hence, we cannot use
it and be a “living sacrifice.”

Eighth, The tongue: Is an unruly member, full of deadly poison.
No man hath ever been able to tame it without the grace of God;
and with this it requires constant watching, held in with bit and
bridle. O! how much it means to have a sanctified tongue; having our
conversation always “seasoned with salt, ministering grace to the
hearers.”

Ninth, Our bodies: With all pertaining thereto, life, health,
strength, family, friends, farms, bank and railroad stock, all are to
be devoted to the cause of human redemption. We give ourselves up to
do and suffer for the Lord Jesus Christ. God wants men and women thus
devoted to His cause in every department of life. In the pulpit and
in the pew; the merchant, the mechanic, the sailor, the scavenger,
the manufacturer, teachers, servants to do the little work, mothers
to rear families, presidents, statesmen, judges, and all rulers in
authority.

Tenth, The results: When professors are thus devoted to the cause
of Christ, a slumbering world will awake to righteousness, and not
before. Then nations will be born in a day, they will learn war no
more. The blood stained banner will be unfurled in every clime; Jesus
Christ will reign from the rivers to the ends of the earth.

Are you a living sacrifice?




                                 XVI.

                       THE LAW AND THE GOSPEL.


The law is our schoolmaster to bring us to Christ. This is the route
ordained of God, there is no other way. Both are necessary to our
salvation. The law reveals to us our lost condition. We must be made
to see our danger, before we will apply the remedy; the Gospel is the
remedy. The law declares that we are diseased. “From the soul of the
foot even unto the head, there is no soundness in it, but wounds, and
bruises, and putrifying sores. They have not been closed, neither
bound up, neither mollified with ointment.” Isaiah 1:6.

The sight that God gives of our natural condition is not very
flattering. The sinner is inclined to think himself pretty good,
until God makes these revelations. Then, as the eye is turned inward,
we are often overwhelmed as we gaze upon our own hearts when under
the direct rays of the Holy Ghost. We loathe ourselves when God we
see, and at the same time, we hear the law proclaiming, “That the
soul that sinneth, _it shall die_.” Now the sinner is burdened with
his own guilt. There seems to be a mountain’s weight upon him, and
from the very depths of his soul he cries out: “O wretched man that I
am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?” Rom. 7:24. I,
that speak in righteousness, _mighty to save_! I from Edom, the land
of Bozra, with garments dyed in blood. The sinner hears the voice; he
listens--he looks away to Calvary--to the cross; he sees the bleeding
victim, he hears words of comfort. “Look unto me, and be ye saved,
all the ends of the earth; for I am God, and there is none else.”
Isaiah 45:22.

There must be harmony between the law and the gospel. If we deal in
the law exclusively, we shall fail to get men saved to God. If we
stop declaring the law, we shall fail to reach the gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ. We must be made to know that we are sick, before we
will apply the remedy. The servant of God must cry aloud, and spare
not; lift up their voice like a trumpet and show the people their
sins, and Israel their transgressions. The great mass of professors
seem to ignore the law altogether. It has become very unpopular to
tell the people that they are sinners, and on their way to hell, and
unless they repent, they will surely perish. But on the other hand,
they are made to believe, and that too, by preachers, that they
are _naturally_ very good, and that we almost confer a great favor
on the Almighty, by letting Him bless us. A man will never give up
his sins, until he becomes sick of them. Hence he should be made
sick as soon as possible, and as sick as possible. Make him so, by
declaring the law to him, that he will disgorge freely and fully,
throwing up anything that caused a bilious state of soul. When this
is accomplished, you can safely apply the gospel remedy, without
much fear of a speedy relapse, or of healing slightly. There is not
much danger of the disease returning, where the system has been
thoroughly purged by law remedies. But to give the sweatmeats of the
gospel to them that need the law, tends to aggravate the case, and
make it worse. But, says one, does not the blood cleanse us from our
sins? Yes, the blood is the foundation, _if we confess our sins_ He
is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness--Glory to God! But to illustrate: In passing a
marble factory we see a large block of marble upon skids. The block
upon which we look is about eight feet long, five thick, and four
wide. A set of gang-saws, propelled by steam power, are cutting this
huge piece of marble up into slabs, about two inches thick. Above
this piece of marble is placed a conductor of water, conveying it
the whole length of the marble, and to every saw. On the top of
this marble is placed a bushel or two of sand. The water falling
upon this, washes it down upon the saws, causing them to execute
their design more rapidly upon the marble. Now, to the point: Our
hearts are naturally hard, stony. We have to be squared by the law;
these saws represent the law. Whatever the law condemns, _must_
be abandoned. The water falling upon the marble, represents the
gospel. We need to mix in a good deal of the gospel with the law.
The sand falling upon the saw is repentance and confession. To make
the law cut, we need to confess our sins; this brings us directly
to the blood. O, glory to God! Its good to live where the blood is
continually dropping upon our hearts. Bless God for the squaring
process of the law, and the polishing touches of the gospel. Brother,
please mix well your preparations with a proper amount of law and
gospel. After dosing out law, until your hearers are in a state of
despair, introduce them to the banqueting house of corn and wine, and
oil; let them feast to their heart’s content, until “Old things have
passed away, and all things become new.”




                                XVII.

                      KEEP THE SABBATH DAY HOLY.


The laws of God are not arbitrary. Every commandment is as reasonable
as it is divine. _Wherefore the law is holy, and the commandments
holy, and just, and good_; having as much regard to the well-being
of man, as to the honor and glory of God. Their tendency in every
instance is evidently beneficial; and he who breaks them, not only
sins against God, but wrongs his own soul. They enjoin nothing but
what is conducive to man’s happiness, nor prohibit anything but what
would ultimately injure him, so that the observance of every command
of God, is as much our interest, as our duty.

The Sabbath is a great blessing to mankind. It is well adapted to
his fallen condition. It gives him rest from labors, and anxiety,
and affords him time to acquire a knowledge of his Author, and
destination, and to prepare for that Eternal rest which is at God’s
right hand. _Therefore remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy: six
days thou shalt labor and do all thy work: but the seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shalt not do any work, thou,
nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man servant, nor thy maid servant,
nor thy cattle, nor any stranger that is within thy gate._

There are many ways in which we may break the Sabbath. It is not
confined to buying, or selling goods, running cars, or vessels,
cheese factories, or patronizing any of these on God’s holy day;
neither is it confined to blacking boots, shaving, getting up extra
dinners, polishing stoves, or knives and forks. Truly in these God is
dishonored, and his laws broken. We are not to visit on the Lord’s
day, except in a _real_ cause of _mercy_. If to help the sick, or to
relieve the needy, it is right; but if we neglect the sick on week
days, _because we cannot afford the time_, or practice a little self
denial, and take the Sabbath for this purpose, _we are guilty before
God_.

Many seem to think they can visit a brother or sister on the Sabbath,
and spend one, two, or more hours, in religious conversation. Is
not the Sabbath, a day of rest? Ought we not, after attending the
usual means of grace, to spend the remaining part of the day, in
reading God’s word, in meditation, and in prayer before Him. These
hours, are sacred to every child of God, and should not be lost,
or their sanctity destroyed, by _thoughtless visitors_. The day is
often profaned, by visiting at church, before and after services.
How painful, to see men and women, professedly saints, standing
around the door, grouped together in the aisles, _visiting_ on God’s
holy day. Brother, sister, ought you not as soon as you enter the
church, commence a prayer meeting, and let it continue until time
for preaching. How much better to enter upon this solemn service,
with hearts burning with the love of God, and a faith that brings
conviction down upon the hearts of sinners, and holds up the preacher
while he is proclaiming God’s eternal truth; where this is done the
shouts of victory will be heard. _Works of piety_, may be done on the
Sabbath, but we may not do our own works, or lean to our own ways. We
are not to _travel_ on the Lord’s day, except on works of _mercy_, or
on works of piety, and this may be determined by the necessities of
the case. If to relieve the sick, or help the needy, all right. But
is it right for those that attend our quarterly meetings, general or
otherwise, to remain until after the morning service, and then hitch
up, and drive five, ten, twenty, or more miles, on Sabbath afternoon
and evening, to reach their homes; is it not in opposition to the
law, which says, _Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy_. I think
it is. I know some that practice this, claim that it is _necessary_.
Not long since, a load of “Pilgrims,” (I think eight, or ten,) came
to a general quarterly meeting, where I was stationed. Immediately
after the morning service they commenced preparations for returning
home Sabbath afternoon. They were urged to remain, and not break the
Lord’s day; they thought it _necessary_, and so they started, but
were caught in a snow storm, and detained just as long as they would
have been had they kept the Sabbath and remained at the meeting.
There are other cases of this kind, where disappointment, and loss
resulted from this course of action. But if there is no pecuniary
loss by such actions, there is great loss to the soul, and to the
cause of Christ. Another reason why one should remain over the
Sabbath, is, all the strength of the meeting is needed on Sabbath
evening; the interest of the meeting has been on the increase,
conviction on the hearts of the unsaved has become more intense,
some have almost decided to say, “I yield, I yield.” God’s saving
power is hovering over precious souls, but it still needs, a steady,
unwavering faith in God. A mighty faith, a united faith, and the
whole faith of the church, to bring the victory; and just when help
is most needed, (I mean human, for God works by means) the laborers
are scattered in various directions, wending their way home.

“If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy
pleasures on my holy day; and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of
the Lord, honorable, and shalt honor Him, not doing thine own ways,
nor finding thine own pleasures, nor speaking thine own words: then
shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord; and I will cause thee to ride
upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of
Jacob thy father: for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it.”




                                XVIII.

                      YOUR FRUIT UNTO HOLINESS.


A few years since, I visited the home of my childhood, after an
absence of more than twenty years. Imagine my astonishment, as I
passed along the way where my weary feet had often trodden in my
childhood’s days. A complete transformation had taken place. The
wilderness had given way to well cultivated fields. It had truly been
made to bud and blossom as the rose. The little log hut, once the
home of the pioneer, had given way to stately mansions. The stillness
that had formerly reigned in those regions, had passed away; and the
hum of husbandry had taken its place. I realized that something had
been done to produce this great change. Many a hard blow had been
given in felling the trees; much toil in removing the timber, and
burning up the underbrush. It then became necessary to introduce
the stump machine, that the old stumps and roots might every one be
removed from the soil. And then, what a transformation! I thought I
saw in this a complete analogy of our natural, depraved condition,
and the transforming power of the Holy Ghost. I realized, in _some_
degree, the labor and suffering that had been given to produce these
wonderful results.

My mind instantly reverted to Gethsemane; to Pilate’s Hall; to
Calvary; to the Crucifixion; the precious blood; its all-cleansing
power to remove the foulest stains that sin hath made; and blessed
be God! to remove all the roots of bitterness connected with our old
man, _depravity_!

                “His blood can make the foulest clean,
                 His blood avails for me.”

But then, how are we to avail ourselves of this glorious power?
Repentance toward God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. Without
repentance, there is no approaching Deity. This must precede all acts
of saving faith. Place it just as God has it.

Repent and believe the Gospel; and by this we understand godly
sorrow, which will lead to a confession of our sins, and a separation
from them, and restitution where possible.

“If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from unrighteousness.” Here is the secret of
success. Repentance! Repentance! “He that covereth his sins shall not
prosper; but whoso confesseth them shall have mercy.”

When old depravity has been thoroughly broken up by repentance,
and the heart washed in the all-cleansing blood, then we have our
fruit unto holiness. There will be a blessed realization that this
consecration which we so frequently make with our lips, has been made
with our hearts, and accepted by the Lord.

                 “Take my soul and body’s powers;
                    Take my mem’ry, mind and will;
                  All my goods and all my hours;
                    All I know and all I feel;
                  All I think, or speak, or do;
                    Take my heart, but make it new.”

Whether, therefore, we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do, it will
be done for the glory of God. Your fruit--unto holiness, and your
end--everlasting life.




                                 XIX.

                      WITHOUT NATURAL AFFECTION.


Has earth a scene more lovely than the family circle--father, mother,
sons and daughters, well-bred, loving each other tenderly, and
bending all their energies to do the will of God on earth, that they
may finally gain the skies? I think not. Then how gladly they welcome
additions to this lovely group. Baby, with its little pug nose,
flaxen hair, ruddy cheeks, soft eyes, and such a sweet, expressible
mouth, are sources of wondrous delight and admiration. How sad,
indeed, must those families be that are not blessed with children.
One of the grandest and most sublime features of the world that is to
come will be the children. “For of such is the kingdom of heaven.”

The family relation is recognized by the Almighty as a holy relation.
He gives us to understand that children are a blessing, and not a
curse. “Lo, children are a heritage of the Lord; and the fruit of the
womb is his reward. As arrows in the hand of a mighty man, so are
children of the youth. Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of
them;” for they shall be “like olive plants around thy table.” And
yet there are a great many that are ashamed of God’s blessing.

I wish right here to ask two questions, and answer them: What is the
most precious thing that each generation has in its keeping? and what
is that which it most neglects and undervalues? To both I make but
one answer--_Children_. In this sinful generation it is considered
by many a disgrace to give, or allow them to have a being, and they
resort to methods highly objectionable to gratify their licensed
sensuality. Thus they prevent life, or cause its destruction; I mean,
they commit murder! The wrath of God is poured out on the nations for
the awful crime of child-murder. The man that whipped his child to
death a few years since, in Western New York, aroused the indignation
of every human being that was made acquainted with the affair. No one
blushed to call it by its right name--_murder_! And is it not murder
to take the life of a human being at any age? and ought not murderers
to be punished accordingly? Is it any the less a crime because it is
fashionable, and millions are doing it? And is it not time the veil
was drawn aside and light from the pulpit and the press let in upon
us brighter than the sun at noonday, until public opinion shall be
thoroughly aroused, and condemnation written on the guilty. To have
children is a duty equal with any of the responsibilities of life.
“Multiply and replenish the earth,” was the command God gave to Adam
and Eve; and this was repeated after the flood. God says again, “I
will that the younger women marry, bear children, guide the house,
give none occasion for the adversary to speak reproachfully.” Save
us, O Lord, from false modesty, and give us natural affection, for
Jesus’ sake. Amen.




                                 XX.

                         SOWING AND REAPING.


It is said that like causes will produce like results in all ages of
the world. This is true, both in a moral and temporal point of view.
If we sow wheat, corn, barley, thistles, we shall reap the same.
Whatever our doings are, it will bring forth its legitimate fruit.
“For whatever a man soweth that shall he also reap. For he that
soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that
soweth to the spirit shall of the spirit reap life everlasting.” This
has been clearly demonstrated in many places where costly churches
have been built. The spirit of emulation has taken possession of
the people, especially in church building. They desire greatly to
go beyond their neighbor in this; and in most cases, they have gone
in their planning operations far beyond their means; consequently,
they are compelled to resort to the lottery department, pic-nics,
sociables, banquetings, excursions, ice-cream, strawberry, and
necktie parties, to carry forward the _grand_ enterprise. One case
will illustrate the many of this character; and yet, the results
may not in every case be as sad as the one I now refer to. But
nevertheless, pride, worldly conformity, spiritual death, will follow
all such departures from the old landmarks. A society in this city
have been struggling along for some years, in all the ways mentioned
above, to raise money to build a costly church. The last banquet this
society held (which was of the necktie order) proved very disastrous
to some members of the church in their domestic relations, if not
their eternal ruin. I took the following extract from the Sunday
_Mercury_, which shows the nature of the seed sown:

“Of Twentieth street M. E. Church, Philadelphia, the brethren and
sisters have been having a calico festival. By Sister Boyer, in New
Jersey, the wrinkle was learned. Of the pattern corresponding to her
apron, each sister deposited a gentleman’s necktie. By the gentleman,
for a quarter of a dollar, the sister whose apron the article matched
the pattern of his purchase, he was permitted ‘piously’ to ‘treat.’
By Brother Broin the party was opened. Sweet Sister Carrigan the
brother led out. The more neck-ties of different patterns a brother
purchased, the more sisters of _course_ he ‘treated.’ Among the heavy
buyers were Brother Kent and Brother Hoffman. What worried Sister
Hoffman was that the religious writer of the _Mercury_ might ‘be
about.’ Of Sister Busby the apron was the handsomest. Brother Roberts
on six neck-ties made investment. So, also, did Bartine. Altogether
the festival was a success.”

This is about the way these things move; and--yet, there were
things connected with this party of a grave character. A brother--a
man having a family--a steward, and a leading man in the society,
purchased a neck-tie. He very soon found a young damsel, whose
apron corresponded with the neck-tie just purchased. He, of course,
according to the rule of the party, was bound (to use a bar-room
phrase), to “treat” her. She took his arm, and away they went to the
place prepared for refreshments. The brother’s wife was present,
and while looking upon the scene, her husband, joking, trifling,
spreeing--and that with a woman he had no right to--_no right within
such relations_; she became disgusted, indignant, at such a departure
from pure religion--yea, from common decency and respectability.

Late at night they returned home, the wife with injured feelings, the
husband delirious from the effects of the exciting scenes that he
had just passed through. We would gladly draw a veil over the scene
that followed, but God must be honored, the truth must be told. The
balance of the night was spent in unpleasant words. In the morning,
the husband repairs to a drinking saloon and gets drunk, which he
continues to do. His family--a wife and a very lovely daughter,
eleven years of age, took the matter very much to heart, weeping and
wailing almost incessantly, which brought on the daughter a violent
disease, and in a few days, death! The wife is very much worn down by
grief, and expects in a few days to follow the daughter. If we sow to
the _flesh_, we shall of the flesh _reap_ corruption. A mistaken idea
prevails among many religionists, _that the end_ (if it be a laudable
one) sanctifies the means; and this prevails to an alarming extent;
hence, the resorting to many ways condemned of God, and by most, if
not all, our legitimate bodies, who declare lotteries to be gambling,
and are prohibited by law; and, yet, many professors of the grace
of God resort to this, to raise means to build costly churches, and
carry forward what they call the work of the Lord. “Shall we do evil
that good may come? God forbid!”

               “No room for mirth or trifling here,
                For worldly hope, or worldly fear,
                  If life so soon is gone;
                If now the Judge is at the door,
                And all mankind must stand before
                  The inexorable throne!

                No matter which my thoughts employ,
                A moment’s misery or joy;
                  But, O! when both shall end,
                Where shall I find my destined place?
                Shall I my everlasting days,
                  With fiends or angels spend?

                Nothing is worth a thought beneath,
                But how I may escape the death,
                  That never, never dies!
                How shall I make my election sure;
                And when I fail on earth, secure
                  A mansion in the skies!”

Dear reader, remember every act goes to the account; every vain and
trifling word; every misspent hour; every neglected Sabbath; every
time Christ has been offered you and rejected; every gospel sermon
that you have heard and have not given heed thereto; every profane
word uttered; every lie told--yea, every act of life, and all the
upbraidings of conscience, are treasures of wrath laid up for you to
reap through all eternity! But if you have been sowing to the Spirit,
life everlasting. Be not deceived, God is not mocked.




                                 XXI.

                         TO ACTUAL SETTLERS.


Our government has been very generous in making a law, giving to
every man a homestead, upon the simple condition that he will settle
upon it. To enjoy this he must be an actual settler. He may talk much
of the beautiful West, how inviting it is; how independent people
become who go West; how strong his desires are to go, and that he
means to go; but unless he packs up and moves on, he will never get
there; he will never know anything about the grandeur of possessing a
home in the West.

God has provided a home in the land of Canaan, the land of perfect
love for all actual settlers. Holiness is a blessed theme; many love
to talk about it, and speculate about the fruit that grows in that
fair clime, where the sun never goes down; “a land of corn, and wine,
and oil, favored with God’s peculiar smile, with every blessing
blest.” There are no obnoxious weeds, such as anger displayed in
kicking back; no pride, as seen in the wearing of gold, and pearls,
and costly attire; no gay churches, too grand for the poor.

No, blessed be God, in that land of perfect love all is pure; the
fountain-head is holy. Every desire is unto the Lord. The stream
of life is without mixture, full of health and life eternal. But
as lovely as this land may be, to possess it we must move upon it,
_be actual settlers_. When we purchase a farm and pay our money for
the same, we receive a warrantee deed, made out correctly, signed
by proper authorities, and sealed by the government seal. It is
precisely so with those that settle down upon a _homestead_ in the
land of perfect love; their title is made as clear as ten thousand
suns could make it. The Holy Ghost writes, ’Tis done, the great
transaction is done; “thou art cleansed from all unrighteousness,”
and this produces a sensation and the soul cries out, “Glory to God!”
Then comes a very comfortable feeling, “I am washed in the blood of
the Lamb.” “His Spirit beareth witness to this great truth, that
we are citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem.” “Now we have received
not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God; that
we might know the things that are freely given to us of God.” A
_homestead_ or entire sanctification is one of the things that are
freely given to us of God, and it is the office of the Holy Ghost to
make us know that we have received it.




                                XXII.

                          THE WIDOW’S MITE.


A few days since, while visiting the United States mint, I was deeply
impressed with various objects of interest that I saw there.

The scales for weighing metals, to the amount of one hundred
thousandth part of an ounce. The dies, for stamping coin, requiring
a pressure of eighty tons. Here, I saw the coin used by different
nations; some of great value, others of less. But what impressed me
the most was a piece of money called, the widow’s mite; supposed to
be worth one half farthing.

I gazed with intense interest upon the widow’s mite; and at the same
time, my thoughts ran back to the time, when Jesus stood opposite
the treasury, and saw the rich casting in their abundance, unto
the Lord, when along came a poor widow, and cast in two mites. How
little, I thought, as I compared “the mite,” with the large pieces
of silver and gold that were upon either side. I presume that many
that witnessed the above transaction, recorded by St. Mark, thought,
“how insignificant the offering.” There was one present, whose eye of
flame penetrates the very intents of the heart, thought differently.
He, declaring to the multitude that, the poor widow’s mite was in His
estimation, greater than the large amounts cast in by the rich. There
are reasons, _why_, the blessed Jesus put such high value on the
widow’s MITE.

First, she made sacrifice of all her living. She gave to the extent
of her ability. In making her consecration, she did not retain a
part, as did Ananias and Saphira; but placed herself squarely upon
the Gospel platform, where she could fully trust the Lord, and claim
His favor. Jesus says, “Give, and it shall be given to you; good
measure pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall
men give into your bosom. For with what measure ye mete withal it
shall be measured to you again.”

Second. She gave, CHEERFULLY--“For God loveth a cheerful giver.”

“For if there be first a willing mind it is accepted according to
that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not.”

Thirdly. She gave her mite, in faith; for what is not of faith is
sin. She doubtless realized, that all of our offerings to God must
be in faith in order to be acceptable. Many lose their reward in
giving, because they do not give cheerfully, but grudgingly; not to
the extent of their ability, nor as much as the case demands, or
conscience, and the Holy Ghost says give; not in faith, but doubting,
because an unwillingness on their part to walk in the light.

This class never prove the fulness of the blessing of the Gospel of
Christ; “pressed down, shaken together, and running over.” Jesus
says, “That it is more blessed to give than to receive.” Glory to God!

Here, is encouragement to give of our substance as God hath prospered
us. There is no investment that we can make with our goods that
pays so well as to give to him that needeth; and especially, to the
house-hold of faith. And to those that have but a mite to give, it
shall receive its reward; if it be to the extent of our ability, if
it be done cheerfully; and if in faith, because we love God, and the
souls and bodies of perishing men.




                                XXIII.

                           ARE WE DRIFTING?


Yes I hope so--out into the ocean of infinite love; away from
the dangerous reefs of formalism; away from the universal spread
of pride and vanity; away from the devil’s most successful
snare, _secretism_; away from the abominable, filthy habit of
whiskey-drinking and tobacco using, and all its slimy associations;
away from the cramping, belittling, soul-destroying, man-debasing
element--_covetousness_; far away from all longings after the
world, its pleasures, its allurements, its honors, its riches, and
plunging into all the fulness of God. It’s glorious thus to drift;
to have a consciousness that you abide in Christ; that you are
growing in grace; that you are gaining on your enemies; that your
faith overcomes the world; that you are taking greater delight, day
by day, in the things of life and immortality. O, glory to God for
the assurance that the saints have that they are getting nearer and
nearer to God every day, drifting out into the great abyss of God’s
eternal love.

To the question so often propounded--“Are We Drifting?”--I can
answer for myself, _I am_, according to the above. Glory to the Lamb
forever! Although I am drifting, moving along with giant strides
by the mighty waves of free grace, yet I never felt so completely
anchored to Christ as now. I have a hope that is an anchor to my
soul. It’s cast to that within the veil, and it’s both sure and
steadfast. It holds my vessel steadily on her course, ’midst all
storms of life. It matters not how high the billows may roll, how
fierce the storms may beat against my frail bark, I am safe. I ride
proudly above the waves, because I am anchored to the eternal Rock of
Ages. Vessels often break loose from their moorings, because their
anchorage is poor. It may be their anchor is dropped in the sand or
mud. In either case, they will drift until their anchor takes hold
on rock, or she drifts ashore and is wrecked. It is so with us. If
our anchor is cast into any of the elements of this world, we shall
drift, not into Christ, but away from him, and become _wrecks_. How
sad it is to find wrecks all along life’s way! to see those that
were once saved of God, moving on to Mount Zion with songs, and
everlasting joy upon their heads; they did obtain joy and gladness,
and sorrow and sighing did flee away; but now, alas! How is the fine
gold become dim.

Which way are _you_ drifting? Do you enjoy perfect love? Are you
as clear in your experience as when you joined the Church? Are you
walking in _all_ the light that God lets shine upon your heart? Does
the light shine as clear as in bygone days? Do you have sensible
manifestations of God’s presence? Do you have the joy of the Lord? Do
you really get blessed of _God_? Do you rejoice evermore? Do you in
everything give thanks? Do you love the _cross_? Is the way that God
leads you delightful? And can you sing--

                      “Jesus all the day long,
                       Is my joy and my song?”

Now, can you, from the very bottom of your heart, say _Yes!_ to these
questions? If so, I think that you are drifting heavenward; if not,
hellward.

Which way are you drifting?




                                XXIV.

                                 PAP.


Webster says the word “pap” means “soft food designed for children
or infants.” Children, whose stomachs are weak and unable to digest
hearty food, have to be fed on this. It requires but little effort of
nature to dispose of this kind of food.

We have in Zion a great many aged infants that require this kind of
spiritual provender. You feed them with the solid roast beef of the
gospel, and immediately they are in cramps and spasms; and O, such
wailings of displeasure. It is as true to-day as when St. Paul wrote
to the Corinthian brethren, there are many that ought to be full
grown men and women in spiritual attainments, but are mere babes,
and have to be fed on infant’s food; and the only way that many can
be persuaded to remain in the church, or even to make a half-way
profession of the religion of Jesus Christ, is to give them large
doses of this precious diet. Many will hang on tremendously, and pull
mightily, so long as they receive that attention and nursing that
their infantile natures demand, but as soon as that stops then comes
the chills.

The cause lies in the fact, they were not weaned. The Psalmist
says, “Surely, I have behaved and quieted myself as a child that is
weaned of his mother: my soul is even as a weaned child.” If you
want to spoil a child, indulge him in all that delights his fancy.
Our heavenly Father knows better than to indulge his children in all
their wants. He has promised to give us what we need--not all we
want. “My God shall supply all your need, according to his riches in
glory by Christ Jesus.” The best discipline that we get in this life,
is to learn to deny self. The direct route to glory lies along that
line. “If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take
up his cross and follow me.” A radical cure is experienced in bearing
the cross. This will crucify us to self, and our longing to be rocked
and dandled at the expense of everybody. Bearing the cross, helping
the souls and bodies of men as they need, and as you are blessed with
means and opportunity will cause you to outgrow all of your infantile
notions. It is gloriously possible to be fully saved in this life; to
run the whole length of the Christian race with joy and gladness; go
on forced marches; yea, on the double quick, carrying heavy knapsacks
of sorrow and affliction, rejoicing evermore, and in everything
giving thanks.




                                 XXV.

                               VICTORY.


It is impossible to have a victory, until we have had a fight. It
would be impossible to shout the shout of victory, unless it had been
fairly gained. In order to win a victory we must fight. The route
from earth to glory is through the battle field. “We must fight if we
would reign.” Thank God, we fight not against flesh and blood, but
against powers, against principalities, against the rulers of the
darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places.
Many a Christian warrior comes from the field of battle with an
inglorious defeat, because he fails to properly estimate the strength
of his enemy. Nations have suffered fearful defeats because they
failed to estimate the character and strength of their foes. When our
rebellion broke out, Lincoln called for 75,000 men to put it down. A
great many at the North said the 75,000 men could conquer the South
before breakfast; but Bull Run told another story. What a sight!
implements of war scattered all the way from Bull Run to Washington!

How many of Zion’s soldiers have started out, full of hope and
courage, giving promise of wonderful achievements, but alas! the very
first foe, the skirmish line, and perhaps that was no more than a
simple sneer from the devil, and defeat followed; like Ahab, pierced
between the joints of the harness, they were borne from the field of
battle on the litter of discouragement.

The hospitals all over the land are full of wounded soldiers; those
who went into battle full of zeal, but failed to estimate the
job they had on hand, were captured, and are now in the hands of
their enemies. Ask such to shout victory! It would be for them an
impossibility. They are prisoners of war.

God expects us not only to fight, but to win. We ought to go from
every battle flushed with victory. The Word says, “Fight the good
fight of faith; lay bold on eternal life.” That is, obtain victory in
every place; the closet, at the family altar, in the prayer meeting,
when the word of God is preached, among the children, in the kitchen,
parlor, trade and commerce, when laboring to bring poor sinners
to Zion, paying your vows unto the Lord, helping on the gospel as
God has prospered you with means, and in every place and under
all circumstances, let victory be written upon your banner. It is
shameful to suffer defeat. “This is the victory that overcometh the
world, even our faith.” How sickening to simply play fight and never
know what a square victory means.

God has provided for our complete success in every engagement. We may
be clad with heavenly armour sufficient to make the weakest saint
victorious. The idea of being on the sick list half or two-thirds of
the time is extreme folly. If you have on the whole armour of God,
you will stand complete in all the will of God, and never know defeat.

                “Courage! your Captain cries,
                   Who all your toil foreknew--
                 Toil ye shall have, yet all despise;
                   I have o’ercome for you.”

Think of it! The Master has overcome for you! Glory to God!




                                XXVI.

                               LOCK UP.


Boats, when running on canals, do not go far on a level, before
they come to a lock. This is made of solid masonry, with two sets
of gates, upper and lower. The water above the lock is from five to
fifteen feet higher than the water below. In order that the vessel
may pass through and pursue her journey, she must enter the lock,
shut the lower gates, turn a wicket in the upper gate which will let
in water from above, filling the lock, and raising the boat to the
level above; the gates will then open, she will pass out and pursue
her journey.

Now, is it not very much so in our religious experience? When
converted, we enter the channel of life. We run on this level for a
season; with some, much longer than others; all, perhaps, too long.
On some canals, levels are very short; but all, that are born of the
Spirit, very early in their experience come to a point where they
must take advance ground, lock up! or go back. We must go into the
lock, shut the gates behind us, leave no possible chance for retreat.
This locking up might represent reconsecrating ourselves to God. In
doing this, we ought to be very specific. Discriminate under the
blazing light of the Holy Ghost. Humble yourself under the hand of
God, by confessing your failures, making wrongs right, and God will
lift you up. Be thorough. Do not be satisfied to run on the same
experience, day in and day out; week in and week out; month in and
month out; year in and year out. Alas! alas! how many run in this
way, on the same level until it becomes a dead level! In some cases
it would be impossible to tell whether there was any current either
way. When we first enter the channel of life, we have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ. “By whom also we have access by faith
into this grace wherein we stand and rejoice in hope of the glory of
God; and not only so, but we glory in tribulation also knowing that
tribulation worketh patience, and patience experience, and experience
hope: and hope maketh not ashamed, because the love of God is shed
abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us.” What
we greatly need in many places among us, is to lock up into the
faith that will give us access into the rich experiences that were
once delivered unto the saints; Elijah, Paul, Hester Ann Rogers,
Carvosso, Bramwell, Fletcher, Wesley, Madam Guvon, Muller, and a host
of others. Then, the communion of faith and love will bear us up to
things above. I said that to elevate a boat from a lower level to a
higher one, water was let in from above. It is precisely so in the
Christian life. If we aim at obedience, becoming more holy, of living
a purer life, in walking in all of God’s ordinances blameless, we
must go often into the lock of crucifixion; then the water of life
will come in from above in living streams, and our experience will
be clearer than the noonday sun. Like the tree planted by the rivers
of water, bringing forth fruit in its season, our leaf also will not
wither.

I want to ask, my dear brethren and sisters of our beloved Zion,
don’t you think it is time that you locked up? Why tarry? Remember
your vows to God and the church. Press for the mark! “Ye shall
receive power, after the Holy Ghost is come upon you.” Bend all your
energies for the summit level.




                                XXVII.

                               SUCCESS.


Success in any department of life, depends upon the right use of
right means; at the right time; in the right place, and in the right
manner. Like causes will produce like results in all ages of the
world. Hence the farmer wishing to raise wheat, breaks up the soil,
sows his seed, and waits patiently for the early and latter rain with
the assurance “that seed-time and harvest will not fail;” and with
rejoicing he gathers thirty, sixty or a hundred fold into his barn.
This is also true of spiritual things. Success is certain to the man
called of God to preach, if he avails himself of the right means,
employs them at the right time, and in the right manner.

1. The means to be employed is the Word of God; and this must come
forth like a stream of fire, from a heart blazing with the love
of God. The command is, “Preach the Word.” Into this armory man
may enter, and take to himself just the weapons that will give him
victory on every battle-field. I thank God! he may be thoroughly
furnished, and never know defeat. “All scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof,
for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of
God may be perfect thoroughly furnished unto all good works.” But
there is more to follow; “Create in me a clean heart, O God; and
renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from thy presence;
and take not thy Holy Spirit from me. Restore unto me the joy of
thy salvation; and uphold me by thy free Spirit. Then will I teach
transgressors thy ways; and sinners _shall_ be converted unto thee.”
Here success is based upon being _thoroughly_ furnished with heaven’s
panoply, the blessing of a clean heart, and possessing the joy of
the Lord. The more I search God’s Word, the more I am convinced that
he has provided means for the complete subjugation of this world
to himself. He never designed that defeat should be written upon
our banners, but that we should press the enemy to the very gates
of hell. “He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed,
shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with
him.” Here is a declaration from God who cannot lie, that, if we go
forth in his strength, having renewed within us a right spirit, the
spirit that will cause us to weep over sinners lost, as Jesus wept
over Jerusalem, and erring Samaria, with this spirit, clad in armor
all divine, we shall come forth from every field of battle, bringing
our sheaves with us. But in order to wield heaven’s artillery
successfully, an experimental knowledge of the same is necessary.
“The laborer must first be partaker of the fruit.”

2. As to time and manner. “Not slothful in business; fervent in
spirit; serving the Lord.” In order to make full proof of our
ministry, every redeemed power must be in complete harmony with God;
employed at the right time, place, and in the right manner; by being
instant in season, and out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort, with
all long suffering and doctrine.

And God who is ever faithful, will make us successful in winning
souls to himself, and leading on believers to the promised land of
perfect love.




                               XXVIII.

                       THEY MIGHT BE A SUCCESS.


There is, just now, considerable inquiry by some portions of the
Methodist family, how to make their _class-meetings_ a success--how
make them more spiritual--how get the members to attend them.

I have a recipe which answers the above, and proves a success in all
cases. In order to get a perfect understanding of the idea, I will
relate a circumstance: When a boy I learned to hunt bees. The country
was new, and bees were often found in hollow trees--frequently with
a large amount of honey. In order to find where the bees lived, I
took a box about ten inches long, six wide, and six deep, with a
glass cover. I would place in this box about one pound of honey. I
would then catch a bee from off some flower, and put him in the box
with the honey, then put the box in some clear place where the sun
could shine upon it. When the bee had filled himself with the honey,
he would fly away to the tree where he lived, always going in a
straight line. He would soon deposit, and return, bringing several
more bees with him. These would fill themselves and fly away to the
tree, deposit, and return, with perhaps an increase of fifty bees. By
some process the bees would communicate the fact that they had found
honey, so on every return trip their numbers rapidly increased, until
it seemed the whole hive was after the honey.

Now, let a class-leader find the honey--get it in his own soul--the
honey of perfect love--the real thing--not a guess so affair, but a
positive holiness; holiness that comes by a perfect consecration,
with a clear endorsement of the Holy Ghost; holiness that shines as
clear as the sun at noonday; opposed to all pomp and display; arrayed
against the devil and all his works; that is dead to the world
and alive to God; holiness that has love divine in every element,
running through every vein, and fibre, and muscle of his spiritual
and intellectual being. This will be the real honey. Yea, sweeter
than honey and the honey-comb. Then you will talk salvation--not
simply about salvation,--you will talk _it_. The real honey will
flow out in your words, and songs of praise, as water flowed from
the smitten rock. A hallowed influence will attend you everywhere.
“The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad” for you; “and
the desert shall rejoice and blossom as the rose. It shall blossom
abundantly, and rejoice with singing.” Then your members will be
charmed with your godly conversation. They will come to class to hear
you talk of Jesus’ wondrous saving power--how he saves you from sin
and sinning. And while you talk the fire will burn. They will catch
the flame and carry the glad tidings to others, and they to others,
until the whole church will be on fire with God’s love. This recipe
is exceedingly good for ministers of the gospel, and in fact for
everybody. Try it.




                                XXIX.

                    FEAR, OR THE SCARE-CROW DEVIL.


Farmers, frequently put up some frightful object in their corn-fields
to scare away the crows--preventing them from pulling up and
eating the corn. The devil works in like manner, to prevent honest
souls from partaking of the real corn of the kingdom. He succeeds
remarkably well, if by any means the saints are prevented from
getting blessed, baptized with the Holy Ghost, and made all alive in
Christ Jesus, and sinners converted to God. He don’t care how much
religion we profess, if we are only destitute of real piety.

He loves to have us profess a giant’s grace if, in fact, we are
empty. This scare-crow, when simmered down to a philosophical
point, is _Fear_. It often presents the very frightful character of
_Wildfire_, _Fanaticism_, _Nazarite_, etc. The Devil is exceedingly
busy, on all occasions, at every means of grace, especially at
quarterly and camp-meeting, to prevent the work of grace. One of
the strangest things in connection with this work is that, the
saints _professedly_, will help the Devil do his miserable work
of unfurling the _scare-crow_ banner. How many inglorious defeats
we have as “Pilgrims,” all through _fear_. Fear of what? Why, our
reputation is at stake. Some are afraid the saints will shout more
than is meet; others that they will jump too high; or the glory that
is unutterable will become unmanageable in some way; or that the
car of salvation will get out of the groove of modern quiet, still
no excitement, sweet, precious holiness that disturbs nobody, kills
nobody, resurrects nobody, leaving all in the cold embrace of death.
From such we say, _Good Lord_, deliver us.

It is exceedingly distressing to be where the work is managed by men
full of _fear_. If a saint happens to get blessed, their appearance,
the peculiar noise made, the length of the amen, the terror produced
among the unsaved, _all_ must be critically tested by their rules
of propriety. What we need is perfect love that casteth out fear;
especially this tormenting fear.

He that feareth is not made perfect in love. “For God has not given
us the spirit of _fear_; but of power and love, and of a sound mind.”
Thank God! we may be delivered out of the hand of our enemies, and
serve him _without fear_, in holiness and righteousness before him
_all the days of our life_.”

                    “Give to the wind your fears,
                     Hope and be undismayed.”

“For whom the Son maketh free, shall be free indeed.”




                                 XXX.

                                TRUST.


There are those that know what the word “trust” means; they know what
it is to _trust_ God for soul and body, for time and eternity. They
have given themselves to him by a perfect consecration; not merely
lip-work, but a consecration that has entered into their very life;
every item has been carefully put on the altar, and then watched--the
fowls kept away until fire from off God Almighty’s burning altar has
fallen upon it and consumed it. They have become a living sacrifice;
dead indeed unto sin, and alive unto God. They realize that they are
not their own; that they have been bought with a price--even the
precious blood. They are no longer carnally minded, but spiritually
minded; no more seek after the flesh, but after the Spirit; no more
desire the applause of the world, but the glory of God. Like the
birds of the air, they _trust_ God for their daily bread,--and glory
be to his holy name, they are not disappointed. Cut off from every
other resource, they lean with all their might on Him that is mighty
to save, and help in every time of need. Though storms and clouds may
gather about them, they are not dismayed, for above all a voice comes
from Him who controls the winds and calms the tempest, saying “I will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee.”

It is perfectly impossible to trust in God with all the heart,
so long as we are trusting in earthly good, of whatever kind or
character it may be. O, how precious it is to trust in God with all
the heart, to have every shore line cut--launching out into the deep
of his eternal love; drinking continually from the stream that makes
glad the city of our God; trusting him every moment for soul and
body, wisdom, and the spirit to guide us in all the affairs of life.

_Trusting_ in God implies being saved to the uttermost--walking in
all the commandments blameless! Trusting implies victory over all
sin--the world, the flesh and the devil. Trusting implies peace and
joy in the Holy Ghost. “They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount
Zion, which cannot be removed, but abideth forever.” “Blessed is the
man that trusteth in Thee.”

                   “Lord, I’m TRUSTING now in thee,
                    Dear Lamb of Calvary,
                    At thy cross I humbly bow,
                    Jesus saves me, saves me now.”




                                XXXI.

                          SEEING EYE TO EYE.


The more I experience of light and love shed abroad in my heart by
the Holy Ghost, the more I am led to believe that all that get fully
saved see things in the same light; _i. e._, eye to eye. I mean those
things which are essential to faith and practice. If the Holy Ghost
is our teacher and the things taught us are a knowledge of ourselves,
our destination--how to secure eternal life--then all would receive
the same instruction.

“Howbeit, when He, the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you
into all truth.”--St. John 16:12. “He shall glorify me; for he shall
receive of mine, and show it unto you.”--St. John 16:14. “But the
Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my
name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.”--St. John 14:26.

This teaching will be in harmony with God’s Word, and that the Holy
Ghost will make plain to our understanding. Without this, the Word
of God, so far as practice and experience are concerned, is a sealed
book! But with the Holy Ghost shining upon the sacred page, all is
luminous. Glory to God!

Worldly conformity, in all its moods and tenses, is as clear as
sunbeams. This gives you an altitude of experience that all the
real saints attain. Placing you where Moses stood, on Pisgah’s top,
you view the surroundings at a glance. This experience puts away
strife and an unholy ambition for position. It brings an end to
controversy between preacher and members. He can preach the whole
truth touching any point of faith and practice with an accompaniment
of hearty amens, and the high praises of God, instead of murmuring
and complaining. How many come into the church with the light shining
upon them; they promise to walk in the light; they have let go of the
world and renounced the hidden things of dishonesty; put on plain
attire; given up their covetousness; have been a great blessing to
the church and cause of Christ. But in an evil hour they have let go
of Christ, and brought darkness upon their souls, and are now ready
to condemn what they once endorsed. The reason why so many oppose the
real work of God, is, because the Holy Ghost is not their teacher; if
he was, they would see eye to eye with God’s real workmen. Then there
would be “a long pull--a strong pull--and a pull altogether,” and the
work of the Lord would move gloriously in all our borders. Rain would
fall in all parts of the land. The wilderness would blossom as the
rose; the voice of the turtle would be heard; showers of grace, the
conversion of sinners, and the sanctification of believers would be
an every day realization. Oh! for a mighty baptism of the Holy Ghost
on our beloved Zion, amen. How important that we see eye to eye! “How
can two walk together, except they are agreed? What fellowship hath
light with darkness? And what concord hath Christ with Belial? or he
that believeth with an infidel.” In view of these facts we need to
be exceedingly cautious who we receive into our communion, whether
it be church, or what is commonly termed _social_ relations. “But
now I have written unto you not to keep company, if any man that is
called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a
railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner; with such an one, no not
to eat.”--1 Cor. 5:11. How, then, can the saint of God unite in holy
wedlock with an unsaved person? How can a young lady, professedly
a saint, keep company and allow herself to be waited upon by an
ungodly man? How can a saint enter into copartnership in business
relations, and allow the partner to keep rum and tobacco anywhere on
the premises? If our eye be single, our whole bodies shall be full of
light.




                                XXXII.

                            THE EDGE OFF.


There are many in these days that once enjoyed the keen edge of
perfect love. It was round about them like a wall of fire. It was
seen in their faces. It beamed out in sacred song, in fervent prayer;
in their testimony it cut its way through like a two-edged sword,
causing sinners to cry for mercy, and the saints to rejoice with
joy unspeakable and full of glory. It was manifest in the tone of
voice; in the very look; it was not wanting in exhortation, and in
preaching, the word was in power and in “demonstration of the Spirit.”

It gave a freshness to all their labor, and they were emphatically
“the lights of the world”--“living epistles, known and read of all
men.” Their experience was positive; nothing doubtful or misty, but
the genuine ring of the pure metal. They passed current for one
hundred cents on the dollar. They did not repudiate a single claim
the Almighty had upon them, but endorsed the whole of God’s Word from
Genesis to Revelation; hence they lived under the direct rays of the
Son of righteousness, causing even the desert to blossom as the rose.
But now, alas! alas! how changed. The gloom of night is upon them.
They go with their heads down like a bullrush. They make the same
motions as formerly, but the power is gone, the edge is off.

O, my dear brother, sister, let me exhort you to edge up. Just put
your head on the _grindstone_ of humble confession; make all wrongs
right, so far as you have the power and ability to do so. You will be
perfectly astonished at the result, if you will just take the back
track to the cross, and then renewedly consecrate your all to God for
time and eternity. Rest not a moment until you are fully restored;
until love, yea, perfect love, sits enthroned in your heart, and you
can sing,--

                “O love divine, how sweet thou art,
                   Now I have found my willing heart,
                 All taken up by thee.”




                               XXXIII.

                          THE OLD SALT-LICK.


When living at Dryden, I was very much impressed with an incident
that came under my observation quite often. It was this: Just in
front of my house was a lot which had been used a number of years for
pasturing cattle. There was one spot near my house, where they had
in the past _salted them_. But time and rain had, to all appearance,
washed away every bit of salt! The place had been so thoroughly
“licked,” that neither grass nor weeds grew there. A horse was
pastured in that lot during the summer of my stay there. Every day
that poor old horse might be seen at that old “salt-lick,” lapping
the dry sand and gravel. I presume that same old horse had been
pastured there when some kind hand had dispensed real _salt_ to the
beast.

I was led to reflect on this wise: How many that profess to be
Christians, that once enjoyed the favor of God, and took great
delight in meeting the saints, and hearing the words of life
preached. These used to be seasons of great refreshing from the
presence of the Lord. The real bread of life was broken with the Holy
Ghost sent down from heaven, while shouts of victory and the divinely
inspired amens were richly interspersed during these gatherings.
Preachers once thought the Holy Ghost an indispensable in feeding the
sheep--not only so, they placed the _salt_ where it could be had,
and the sheep liked it. How strange it is to see those that once
fed on real manna, (salt) corn, and wine, and oil, now satisfied in
_licking_ dry sand and gravel--earthly pleasures; a religion that has
no Holy Ghost in it; a simple skeleton, bones without meat; yea, the
sensuality of a godless world. Is it not a fact, that multitudes, as
specified above, feed on the _carrion_ of this poor world, and call
it salvation? and then wonder why they do not see such displays of
God’s power as our fathers did. Thank God--

                “There is a place where Jesus sheds
                 The oil of gladness on our heads.”

A great many have said to me, “I have not had a square meal in a long
time. We get occasionally a few crumbs.” Bless God! our Father is
rich. If you will pay the _price_ you can eat the good of the land.

                 “Rejoicing now in earnest hope,
                  I stand, and from the mountain top
                    See all the land below.
                  Rivers of milk and honey rise,
                  And all the fruits of paradise
                    In endless plenty grow.”




                                XXXIV.

                             BE POSITIVE.


The Bible is positive in all its statements. The religion of
Jesus Christ is positive. All the work of the Spirit is positive;
conviction, regeneration, the witness of the Spirit, pardon and
purity, are alike positive; and so in every step in grace, from
its beginning to its consummation in glory. Thinking, hoping, and
guessing, that I am a child of God, is dispensed with in the work
of grace. The real child of God has passed from the doubtful,
misty, uncertainties, to a glorious realization of facts. We hear
him exclaim, I know that my redeemer liveth, Glory to God! Again,
whereas I was once blind, I now see. Once more, I am crucified with
Christ, nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me; and
the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the
Son of God. Brother, sister, dispose of your uncertain experiences,
and get a positive, Bible holiness, bearing its legitimate
fruit--righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.




                                XXXV.

                            THE DEAD LINE.


During the great Rebellion, the rebels had, at Andersonville, a
prison, or stockade, where our fathers, brothers, and sons were
unmercifully murdered. Within this stockade was drawn a line,
marking the utmost limits of their freedom, and this was called “The
Dead-line.” It said to the prisoners, “Thus far thou shalt go, and no
farther.” The penalty of death was inflicted upon all that approached
this line. Many received the deadly bullet for daring to tread
forbidden ground.

_The Dead-line_ fairly represents this world, and the utmost limits
of our freedom. When God created man, he placed him in Paradise,
and put around him the “dead-line,” saying “In the day thou eatest
thereof, thou shalt surely die.” Adam transgressed the command of
God, and received the death-penalty. _Adam died._

_The Dead-line_ is still visible, and laid down in the great Statute
Book, as the “broad way that leads to death.” We see almost every
day, men and women approaching the Dead-line, and death ensues.
“Whosoever, therefore, will be a friend of the world, is the enemy
of God.” Was it not strange, that our boys in blue, in seeing their
comrades shot down daily for approaching this line, would go in the
same direction, and receive their fate?

It is precisely so with many that profess the grace of God to-day.
Women that were once saved in God, conforming to the divine
command, “I will that women adorn themselves in modest apparel,
with shamefacedness and sobriety, not with broidered hair or gold,
or pearls or costly array, but which becometh women professing
godliness, with good works.” But now, alas! how changed. The gold has
become dim. Hearts that were all aglow with the love of God; tongues
employed in giving glory to him, telling of his wondrous power to
save; physical powers all devoted to the redemption of a lost world;
goods and chattels, all consecrated to the grand end of life eternal;
time and talents; yea, all my store, more shouldst thou have if I
had more, was the language of their hearts; but now, alas! they
have evidently been too near the “Dead-line.” The odor of death is
realized all through their ranks. It might well be sung--

                “Hark! from the tomb a doleful sound.”

Avoid the route that brings spiritual death! “If thine eye offend
thee, pluck it out and cast it from thee,” or anything as dear as the
eye, for it is better to enter into life halt than to be cast into
hell with all our members.




                               XXXVII.

                              PUMP-LOGS.


They are used for conveying water from the fountain to the
inhabitants in the valleys below. Should they become decayed--rotten,
the water must of necessity be greatly injured, if not entirely
spoiled. Frequently whole communities have been made sick, and
in some cases many have died in consequence of using poisoned
water. Every minister of the gospel is a drawer of water to his
congregation. But if ministers become rotten by coming in contact
with foreign substances--such as jesting, filthy conversation,
mingling in the society of the worldly minded, in parties of
pleasure, joining hand in hand with secret oath-bound societies,
doing all for policy’s sake, preaching a gospel to please ungodly
professors of the religion of Jesus Christ, or catering to the lusts
and passions of the professedly unregenerate, wearing gold, sneering
at those who profess to live without sin, treating lightly, or wholly
ignoring the doctrine of being made holy in this life--they must be
indeed rotten pump-logs. God expects that every minister, in his
ministrations to the people, will convey the water of life _pure_.
“Be ye holy,” is the great command; and through the foolishness of
preaching God intends to save them that believe. “Be ye clean that
bear the vessels of the Lord.”




                               XXXVII.

                               THE END.


THE GRAVE, is the end of all men, so far as this world goes;
especially, is this true in regard to the rich, they have their
portion in this life; they make no provision for the great hereafter,
or the life that is to come. With them, it is emphatically, “_Earth
to earth, ashes to ashes and dust to dust_.” They see nothing beyond
the grave worth their time and thought; consequently they make
marvelous, and very costly preparation for resting places for their
bodies, and leave their souls, that must live forever, in bliss
or woe, to chance. We give below the preparation that some of the
millionaires have made for their bodies.

The death and burial of such famous men as Grant, Tilden, Hendricks
and Arthur, and the recent removal of the remains of William H.
Vanderbilt from the receiving vault in the Moravian cemetery at NEW
DORP to its final resting place in the big granite tomb, awaken
an interest in the instances where well known living men have
made provision for their interment after death. All the beautiful
cemeteries in the vicinity of New York, contain evidence of the care
with which some men have arranged for their bodies a resting place
after the soul has passed into eternity.

Woodlawn seems to take the lead. Although the late Commodore made no
preparation for his grave except to own a modest little lot at New
Dorp, and the newly constructed mausoleum of William H. Vanderbilt
contains several catacombs, several members of the family have
secured beautiful plots at Woodlawn. Among the mausoleums built here,
is that of the late Frederick Butterfield, erected long before he
died, which cost $40,000.

OPPOSITE CORNELIUS VANDERBILT’S plot at Central and Poplar avenues,
is that of William H. Appleton, joined by that of A. H. Borney. A
little further along is a beautiful mausoleum of Westerly granite,
built by Christian Hester, of Hester Brothers. Mr. H. H. Cook, the
millionaire of Seventy-Eighth street and Fifth avenue, paid $20,000
for a plot sometime ago, and is building a mausoleum which will cost
$40,000 more. A large plot on Beachlawn, conspicuous for a large
figure of Hope eight feet high, mounted on a pedestal rising thirty
feet high, from a base nine feet square, marks the burial plot of
William H. Havemeyer. H. M. Flagler, of the Standard oil company,
has a beautiful tomb built on a hill not far from that wherein rest
the remains of Marshall O. Roberts, whose sarcophagus marks the same
appreciation of art that characterized his life.

COLLIS P. HUNTINGTON, president of the Central Pacific railway, and
one of the best known of the magnates of Wall street, has laid some
curious plans for his grave. He intends that his remains shall be
laid to rest at Woodlawn, in a mausoleum more pretentious and more
costly and of greater proportions than any yet built. The stones that
will be used in its construction he proposes shall each be of such
enormous weight that no ordinary railroad car can carry them. They
will be brought as near as possible to the cemetery by boat, and then
rolled on immense rollers over the country roads to the site of the
tomb. If they have to cross over bridges, they will be strengthened
by new abutments.

JAY GOULD has made elaborate provision for the disposition of his
body after death; but nothing for his soul. He has erected on Central
avenue, in Woodhaven cemetery a costly and imposing structure. It
occupies the highest elevation of the grounds, and commands a view
of the 400 acres given up to _tenements_ of the dead. The ground
on which the mausoleum stands is 250 feet across, and is circular
in form. It cost $60,000. The mausoleum, the exterior of which is
modeled after one of the most famous buildings that once stood on the
Acropolis in Athens--the Parthenon cost $50,000. More than 800 tons
of Westerly granite was used in its construction. The building is
37 feet long and 19 feet wide, and is surrounded by Doric pillars,
thirty in number. Five pieces of solid granite compose the roof,
each piece being 30 feet long and 6 feet wide. The door is solid
bronze and cost $3,000. Within the mausoleum are twelve shelves or
catacombs, divided by an aisle 10 feet wide, at the end of which is
an ornate stained glass window, representing the heavenly choir.
Each of the catacombs is 8 feet long and 2½ feet deep. A heavy slab
of polished marble constitutes the face of each, and will doubtless
contain the name and so on of the person whose body is deposited
therein. Imbedded in each stone is a heavy bronze handle. No name
will appear on the outside of the mausoleum to show who lies buried
within. Many more rich business men of New York and other parts of
this country have made like preparation for their bodies when they
die.

LELAND STANFORD of California, is preparing a mausoleum of far
greater pretensions than any other American; when finished, it will
cost $100,000. The site selected is a beautiful four acre plot in
the Senator’s grounds just outside San Francisco. The structure will
be in the form of a temple, and will be twenty-five feet square.
There will be a double row of massive granite columns supporting
the roof of the portico at the front. On each side of the entrance
will be a majestic sphynx carved from a single block of granite.
Heavy bronze gates close the entrance, and within are solid doors of
polished granite. The stone used is from Barre, Vermont. It will be
finished inside with polished marble from Italy. Here will rest the
millionaire, wife and son, and here will end their history.

CHARLEMAGNE, that in the eighth century, made Europe tremble by his
political power, gave direction that when his body should be laid in
the dust, it should not be like common mortals. He was therefore,
arrayed in a royal mantle, and placed in a kingly chair. A crown
crested with jewels, rested on his lifeless brow; his favorite sword,
Joyuse, was by his side, and the open scroll of the gospels on his
knees; and thus the mighty conqueror was left alone in his sealed
tomb for one hundred and eighty years. Then it came into the mind
one day of his successors to open this tomb and see how it fared
with the great Emperor, and what had become of the riches of his
grand mausoleum. So King Otho ordered the sealed tomb to be opened,
and with curious eye he entered this vault of death, CHARLEMAGNE
sat there still! But Oh, what a ghastly sight! The royal robes were
dropping away from the skeleton form. The crown had sunk over the
skeleton brow, and this was the only mark of royalty left. Otho
called, but the great Emperor was silent. He approached and touched
the Monarch, but in an instant it collapsed into dust. No matter
how great or prosperous our lives may have been here, all must end
at last. Even a King’s riches cannot bribe death and the mouldering
graves.

How much better it would have been, had these millionaires
consecrated their lives, their wealth, their influence, to Jesus
Christ. They might have secured to themselves robes of royalty, and
crowns, all immortal, that would not have crumbled at the touch of
time, but grown brighter and brighter to all eternity. They bartered
all for earth’s gilded toys, O, think, of what they might have had,
the unspeakable gift--a life in Christ.

                ETERNITY!--
             “What is Eternity? Can aught
              Paint its duration to the thought?
              Tell every beam the sun emits,
              When in sublimest noon he sits;
              Tell every light-winged mote that strays
              Within its ample round of rays;
              Tell all the leaves and all the buds
              That crown the garden, fields, and wood;
              Tell all the spires of grass the meads
              Produce, when spring propitious leads
                The new-born year--
              Be this astonishing account
              Augmented with the full amount
              Of all the drops the clouds have shed
              Where’er their watery fleeces spread
              Through all time’s long-protracted tour;
              Tell all the sands the ocean laves,
              Tell all the changes of its waves,
              Or tell, with more laborious pains,
              The drops its mighty mass contains.

                  *       *       *       *       *

              Were there a belt that could contain
              In its vast orb the earth and main,
              With figures were it clustered o’er,
              And not one cipher in the score;
              And could your laboring thoughts assign
              The total of the extended line:
              How vast the amount, the attempt how vain
              To read duration’s endless chain;
              For when as many years have run,
              Eternity is but begun!
              Then think, O man, and strive to attain,
              The eternal life, the Immortal’s gain!”

“What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose
his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?”




                               XXXVIII.

                             CONCLUSION.


It may be due the patient reader to know that I was born July the
18th, 1824, in the town of Scipio, Cayuga County, N. Y. I received
some of the advantages derived from the common schools of the day,
but my most thorough drill has been the long and varied term of
rugged experience, burnished up at the University of wide-spread
observation. Having had the blessing of the Lord on my heart while
writing this book, and writing, as we humbly trust, for the glory of
God, we now send it out to greet the dear saints--with the prayer
that all that read it, may be greatly blessed and made much better
for so doing.

        Yours in Christ,

                                            REV. ZENAS OSBORNE.




                         TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


    Chapter: 2, paragraph: 7
        - ‘convictions’ replaced with ‘conviction’
          (My conviction for this)

    Chapter: 4, paragraph: 17
        - Opening quote marks missing in text.
          (and the Congregational churches.”)

    Chapter: 5, paragraph: 2
        - ‘annointed’ replaced with ‘anointed’
          (Touch not mine anointed,)

    Chapter: 5, paragraph: 23
        - ‘intantly’ replaced with ‘instantly’
          (The Baptist sister was killed instantly.)

    Chapter: 5, paragraph: 24
        - ‘dephts’ replaced with ‘depths’
          (the very depths of humility,)

    Chapter: 6, paragraph: 2
        - ‘providental’ replaced with ‘providential’
          (God’s providential care)

    Chapter: 6, paragraph: 15
        - Opening quote marks missing in text.
          (in time of need.”)

    Chapter: 6, paragraph: 16
        - ‘visted’ replaced with ‘visited’
          (Wife and I visited those)

    Chapter: 6, paragraph: 17
        - ‘eppointment’ replaced with ‘appointment’
          (At another appointment where)

    Chapter: 6, paragraph: 18
        - Opening quote marks missing in text.
          (anything from that source.”)

    Chapter: 7, paragraph: 30
        - ‘Abion’ replaced with ‘Albion’
          (quarterly meeting at Albion, N. Y.,)

        - ‘Pentacostal’ replaced with ‘Pentecostal’
          (This was a Pentecostal meeting.)

        - Opening quote marks missing in text.
          (‘HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD.’”)

    Chapter: 7, paragraph: 31
        - repeated word ‘heads’ removed
          (Bro. Hard is all heads and points.)

    Chapter: 7, paragraph: 39
        - ‘illustarate’ replaced with ‘illustrate’
          (Now to illustrate)

    Chapter: 8, paragraph: 16
        - ‘experiance’ replaced with ‘experience’
          (in failing to preach, experience to live,)

        - ‘seperation’ replaced with ‘separation’
          (and makes a complete separation)

        - ‘ascendency’ replaced with ‘ascendancy’
          (powers of darkness were in the ascendancy)

        - ‘occured’ replaced with ‘occurred’
          (This occurred in 1858.)

        - ‘harrassed’ replaced with ‘harassed’
          (they had been harassed for a long time)

        - ‘Brittons’ replaced with ‘Britons’
          (forcing the Britons back to the)

        - ‘Britton’ replaced with ‘Britain’
          (masters of Great Britain,)

    Chapter: 8, paragraph: 17
        - ‘Brittons’ replaced with ‘Britons’
          (the Britons were driven to Wales)

        - ‘Advocats’ replaced with ‘Advocate’
          (Editor of the Buffalo Advocate)

    Chapter: 8, paragraph: 20
        - ‘Erricson’ replaced with ‘Ericsson’
          (When the Ericsson Monitor steamed )

        - ‘where-ever’ replaced with ‘wherever’
          (wherever this life-boat touched)

    Chapter: 8, paragraph: 21
        - duplicate ‘a’ removed
          (consider in a new light)

    Chapter: 8, paragraph: 31
        - ‘yerterday’ replaced with ‘yesterday’
          (the same yesterday, to-day and forever.)

    Chapter: 9, paragraph: 9
        - ‘accurser’ replaced with ‘accuser’
          (He is the accuser of the brethren.)

    Chapter: 9, paragraph: 16
        - ending quote mark added
          (descending on the Son of Man.”)

    Chapter: 9, paragraph: 20
        - ‘Pharoah’ replaced with ‘Pharaoh’
          (impressive dream was that of Pharaoh)

    Chapter: 9, paragraph: 26
        - ‘discoverd’ replaced with ‘discovered’
          (I soon discovered what my milk meant.)

    Chapter: 10, paragraph: 3
        - ‘possesor’ replaced with ‘possessor’
          (immediately to its possessor.)

    Chapter: 10, paragraph: 18
        - ‘be we’ replaced with ‘we be’
          (in what way may we be benefited)

    Chapter: 10, paragraph: 28
        - leading “ mark not needed and removed
          (As an example of)

    Chapter: 12, paragraph: 24
        - ‘philosopers’ replaced with ‘philosophers’
          (the objections of philosophers)

    Chapter: 15, paragraph: 1
        - ‘sarificial’ replaced with ‘sacrificial’
          (The time for sacrificial offerings)

    Chapter: 16, paragraph: 3
        - ‘billious’ replaced with ‘bilious’
          (that caused a bilious state)

    Chapter: 17, paragraph: 4
        - ‘heep’ replaced with ‘keep’
          (to keep it holy)

    Chapter: 17, paragraph: 5
        - ‘the with thee’ replaced with ‘thee with the’
          (feed thee with the heritage of Jacob )

    Chapter: 29, paragraph: 2
        - ‘excedingly’ replaced with ‘exceedingly’
          (The Devil is exceedingly busy)

    Chapter: 29, paragraph: 4
        - Opening quote marks missing in text.
          (all the days of our life.”)

    Chapter: 31, paragraph: 4
        - ‘darknesss’ replaced with ‘darkness’
          (and brought darkness upon their souls)

    Chapter: 35, paragraph: 1
        - ‘prisioners’ replaced with ‘prisoners’
          (It said to the prisoners)

    Chapter: 37, paragraph: 1
        - ‘wordly’ replaced with ‘worldly’
          (the society of the worldly minded)

    Chapter: 37, paragraph: 2
        - ‘paesed’ replaced with ‘passed’
          (after the soul has passed into eternity.)

    Chapter: 37, paragraph: 8
        - ‘CHARLEMANGE’ replaced with ‘CHARLEMAGNE’
          (CHARLEMAGNE sat there still!)





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Born of the Spirit, by Zenas Osborne

